The Malleus Maleficarum




file:///C|/!!witch/home.html [2002-01-20 12:41:37 PM]
The Malleus Maleficarum


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                              of Heinrich Kramer and James Sprenger

                          Unabridged online republication of the 1928 edition. Introduction to the 1948 edition is also included.
                               Translation, notes, and two introductions by Montague Summers. A Bull of Innocent VIII.



          ●   The Malleus Maleficarum                  The Malleus Maleficarum (The Witch Hammer), first
         ● Search the Malleus                    published in 1486, is arguably one of the most infamous
                                                 books ever written, due primarily to its position and regard
         ● Introduction to Online Edition        during the Middle Ages. It served as a guidebook for
                                                 Inquisitors during the Inquisition, and was designed to aid
         ● Introduction to 1948 Edition
                                                 them in the identification, prosecution, and dispatching of
         ● Introduction to 1928 Edition          Witches. It set forth, as well, many of the modern
         ● A Note Upon the Bibliography misconceptions and fears concerning witches and the
                                                 influence of witchcraft. The questions, definitions, and
         ● The Bull of Innocent VIII
                                                 accusations it set forth in regard to witches, which were
         ● Letter of Approbation                 reinforced by its use during the Inquisition, came to be
                                                 widely regarded as irrefutable truth. Those beliefs are held
         downloads
                                                 even today by a majority of Christians in regard to
         ● Adobe PDF Version                     practitioners of the modern “revived” religion of
         ● eBook Version                         Witchcraft, or Wicca. And while the Malleus itself is
         ● MS Word Version
                                                 largely unknown in modern times, its effects have proved
                                                 long lasting.
         ● Write Us
                                                       At the time of the writing of The Malleus
                                                 Maleficarum, there were many voices within the Christian
                                                 community (scholars and theologians) who doubted the
       existence of witches and largely regarded such belief as mere superstition. The authors of the
       Malleus addressed those voices in no uncertain terms, stating: “Whether the Belief that there are
       such Beings as Witches is so Essential a Part of the Catholic Faith that Obstinacy to maintain the
       Opposite Opinion manifestly savours of Heresy.” The immediate, and lasting, popularity of the
       Malleus essentially silenced those voices. It made very real the threat of one being branded a
       heretic, simply by virtue of one's questioning of the existence of witches and, thus, the validity of
       the Inquisition. It set into the general Christian consciousness, for all time, a belief in the existence
       of witches as a real and valid threat to the Christian world. It is a belief which is held to this day.
             It must be noted that during the Inquisition, few, if any, real, verifiable, witches were ever
       discovered or tried. Often the very accusation was enough to see one branded a witch, tried by the
       Inquisitors' Court, and burned alive at the stake. Estimates of the death toll during the Inquisition
       worldwide range from 600,000 to as high as 9,000,000 (over its 250 year long course); either is a
       chilling number when one realizes that nearly all of the accused were women, and consisted
       primarily of outcasts and other suspicious persons. Old women. Midwives. Jews. Poets. Gypsies.

file:///C|/!!witch/index.htm (1 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:02:35 PM]
The Malleus Maleficarum

       Anyone who did not fit within the contemporary view of pieous Christians were suspect, and
       easily branded "Witch". Usually to devastating effect.
             It must also be noted that the crime of Witchcraft was not the only crime of which one could
       be accused during the Inquisition. By questioning any part of Catholic belief, one could be branded
       a heretic. Scientists were branded heretics by virtue of repudiating certain tenets of Christian belief
       (most notably Galileo, whose theories on the nature of planets and gravitational fields was initially
       branded heretical). Writers who challenged the Church were arrested for heresy (sometimes
       formerly accepted writers whose works had become unpopular). Anyone who questioned the
       validity of any part of Catholic belief did so at their own risk. The Malleus Maleficarum played an
       important role in bringing such Canonical law into being, as often the charge of heresy carried
       along with it suspicions of witchcraft.
             It must be remembered that the Malleus is a work of its time. Science had only just begun to
       make any real advances. At that time nearly any unexplainable illness or malady would often be
       attributed to magic, and thus the activity of witches. It was a way for ordinary people to make
       sense of the world around them. The Malleus drew upon those beliefs, and, by its very existence,
       reinforced them and brought them into the codified belief system of the Catholic Church. In many
       ways, it could be said that it helped to validate the Inquisition itself.
             While the Malleus itself cannot be blamed for the Inquisition or the horrors inflicted upon
       mankind by the Inquisitors, it certainly played an important role. Thus has it been said that The
       Malleus Maleficarum is one of the most blood-soaked works in human history, in that its very
       existence reinforced and validated Catholic beliefs which led to the prosecution, torture, and
       murder, of tens of thousands of innocent people.
             The lasting effect of the Malleus upon the world can only be measured in the lives of the
       hundreds of thousands of men, women, and even children, who suffered, and died, at the hands of
       the Inquisitors during the Inquisition. At the height of its popularity, The Malleus Maleficarum
       was surpassed in public notoriety only by The Bible. Its effects were even felt in the New World,
       where the last gasp of the Inquisition was felt in the English settlements in America (most notably
       in Salem, Massachusetts during the Salem Witch Trials).
             It is beyond the scope of this article to adequately examine the role of the Malleus in world
       history, or its lasting effects. At the very least, The Malleus Maleficarum (The Witch Hammer)
       offers to us an intriguing glimpse into the Medieval mind, and perhaps gives us a taste of what it
       might have been like to have lived in those times.
              - Wicasta Lovelace

                                  Summation of the Malleus Maleficarum by Edo Nyland




file:///C|/!!witch/index.htm (2 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:02:35 PM]
The Malleus Maleficarum




                                                             Purchase the
                                                         Malleus Maleficarum
                                                          from Amazon.Com


                                    View Cover




                                           “The Malleus Maleficarum” was transcribed by
                                                Wicasta Lovelace and Christie Rice.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2001 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/index.htm (3 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:02:35 PM]
Table of Contents


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                          Table of Contents
   ●   The First Part - Treating on the three necessary concomitants of witchcraft which are the Devil, a
       witch, and the permission of Almighty God.

   ●   The Second Part - Treating on the methods by which the works of witchcraft are wrought and
       directed, and how they may be successfully annulled and dissolved.

   ●   The Third Part - Relating to the judicial proceedings in both the Ecclesiastical and Civil courts
       against witches and indeed all heretics.

                                         “The Malleus Maleficarum” was transcribed by
                                              Wicasta Lovelace and Christie Rice.

                         HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998, 1999 by the Windhaven Network®.
                                               All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/mmtoc.html [2002-01-20 12:02:38 PM]
The First Part


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                 THE FIRST PART
     THE FIRST PART TREATING OF THE THREE NECESSARY
CONCOMITANTS OF WITCHCRAFT, WHICH ARE THE DEVIL, A WITCH,
           AND THE PERMISSION OF ALMIGHTY GOD

Question I                     Whether the Belief that there are such Beings as Witches is so Essential a Part
                               of the Catholic Faith that Obstinacy to maintain the Opposite Opinion
                               manifestly savours of Heresy.


Question II                    If it be in Accordance with the Catholic Faith to maintain that in Order to bring
                               about some Effect of Magic, the Devil must intimately co-operate with the Witch,
                               or whether one without the other, that is to say, the Devil without the Witch, or
                               conversely, could produce such an Effect.


Question III                   Whether Children can be Generated by Incubi and Succubi.


Question IV                    By which Devils are the Operations of Incubus and Succubus Practised?


Question V                     What is the Source of the Increase of Works of Witchcraft? Whence comes it that
                               the Practice of Witchcraft hath so notably increased?


Question VI                    Concerning Witches who copulate with Devils. Why is it that Women are chiefly
                               addicted to Evil superstitions?


Question VII                   Whether Witches can Sway the Minds of Men to Love or Hatred.


Question VIII                  Whether Witches can Hebetate the Powers of Generation or Obstruct the
                               Venereal Act.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_toc.html (1 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:02:38 PM]
The First Part

Question IX                    Whether Witches may work some Prestidigatory Illusion so that the Male Organ
                               appears to be entirely removed and separate from the Body.


Question X                     Whether Witches can by some Glamour Change Men into Beasts.


Question XI                    That Witches who are Midwives in Various Ways Kill the Child Conceived in the
                               Womb, and Procure an Abortion; or if they do not this Offer New-born Children
                               to Devils.


Question XII                   Whether the Permission of Almighty God is an Accompaniment of Witchcraft.


Question XIII                  Herein is set forth the Question, concerning the Two Divine Permissions which
                               God justly allows, namely, that the Devil, the Author or all Evil, should Sin, and
                               that our First Parents should Fall, from which Origins the Works of Witches are
                               justly suffered to take place.



                                       Solutions of the Arguments.
Question XIV                   The Enormity of Witches is Considered, and it is shown that the Whole Matter
                               should be rightly Set Forth and Declared.


Question XV                    It is Shown that, on Account of the Sins of Witches, the Innocent are often
                               Bewitched, yea, Sometimes even for their Own Sins.


Question XVI                   The Foregoing Truths are Set out in Particular, this by a Comparison of the
                               Works of Witches with Other Baleful Superstitions.


Question XVII                  A Comparison of their Crimes under Fourteen Heads, with the Sins of the Devils
                               of all and every Kind.


Question XVIII                 Here follows the Method of Preaching against and Controverting Five
                               Arguments of Laymen and Lewd Folk, which seem to be Variously Approved,
                               that God does not Allow so Great Power to the Devil and Witches as is involved
                               in the Performance of such Mighty Works of Witchcraft.



file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_toc.html (2 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:02:38 PM]
The First Part

                                                   Main Index


                                          "The Malleus Maleficarum" was transcribed by
                                               Wicasta Lovelace and Christie Rice.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_toc.html (3 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:02:38 PM]
Part I, Question I - P.1


                                   THE
                           MALLEUS MALEFICARUM

     THE FIRST PART TREATING OF THE THREE NECESSARY
CONCOMITANTS OF WITCHCRAFT, WHICH ARE THE DEVIL, A WITCH,
           AND THE PERMISSION OF ALMIGHTY GOD
                                                                PART I.
                                                              QUESTION I.
                                           Here beginneth auspiciously the first part
                                               of this work. Question the First.

             Whether the belief that there are such beings as witches is so essential a part of the Catholic
       faith that obstinately to maintain the opposite opinion manifestly savours of heresy. And it is
       argued that a firm belief in witches is not a Catholic doctrine: see chapter 26, question 5, of the
       work of Episcopus. Whoever believes that any creature can be changed for the better or the worse,
       or transformed into another kind or likeness, except by the Creator of all things, is worse than a
       pagan and a heretic. And so when they report such things are done by witches it is not Catholic,
       but plainly heretical, to maintain this opinion.
             Moreover, no operation of witchcraft has a permanent effect among us. And this is the proof
       thereof: For if it were so, it would be effected by the operation of demons. But to maintain that the
       devil has power to change human bodies or to do them permanent harm does not seem in
       accordance with the teaching of the Church. For in this way they could destroy the whole world,
       and bring it to utter confusion.
             Moreover, every alteration that takes place in a human body - for example, a state of health or
       a state of sickness - can be brought down to a question of natural causes, as Aristotle has shown in
       his 7th book of Physics. And the greatest of these is the influence of the stars. But the devils
       cannot interfere with the stars. This is the opinion of Dionysius in his epistle to S. Polycarp. For
       this alone God can do. Therefore it is evident the demons cannot actually effect any permanent
       transformation in human bodies; that is to say, no real metamorphosis. And so we must refer the
       appearance of any such change to some dark and occult cause.
             And the power of God is stronger than the power of the devil, so divine works are more true
       than demoniac operations. Whence inasmuch as evil is powerful in the world, then it must be the
       work of the devil always conflicting with the work of God. Therefore as it is unlawful to hold that
       the devil's evil craft can apparently exceed the work of God, so it us unlawful to believe that the
       noblest works of creation, that is to say, man and beast, can be harmed and spoiled by the power of
       the devil.
             Moreover, that which is under the influence of a material object cannot have power over
       corporeal objects. But devils are subservient to certain influences of the stars, because magicians
       observe the course of certain stars in order to evoke the devils. Therefore they have not the power


file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_01a.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:02:39 PM]
Part I, Question I - P.1

       of effecting any change in a corporeal object, and it follows that witches have even less power than
       the demons possess.
             For devils have no power at all save by a certain subtle art. But an art cannot permanently
       produce a true form. (And a certain author says: Writers on Alchemy know that there is no hope of
       any real transmutation.) Therefore the devils for their part, making use of the utmost of their craft,
       cannot bring about any permanent cure - or permanent disease. But if these states exist it is in truth
       owing to some other cause, which may be unknown, and has nothing to do with the operations of
       either devils or witches.
             But according to the Decretals (33) the contrary is the case. “If by witchcraft or any magic art
       permitted by the secret but most just will of God, and aided by the power of the devil, etc . . . . ”
       The reference here is to any act of witchcraft which may hinder the end of marriage, and for this
       impediment to take effect three things can concur, that is to say, witchcraft, the devil, and the
       permission of God. Moreover, the stronger can influence that which is less strong. But the power
       of the devil is stronger than any human power (Job xl). There is no power upon earth which can be
       compared to him, who was created so that he fears none.
             Answer. Here are three heretical errors which must be met, and when they have been
       disproved the truth will be plain. For certain writers, pretending to base their opinion upon the
       words of S. Thomas (iv, 24) when he treats of impediments brought about by magic charms, have
       tried to maintain that there is not such a thing as magic, that it only exists in the imagination of
       those men who ascribe natural effects, the cause whereof are not known, to witchcraft and spells.
       There are others who acknowledge indeed that witches exist, but they declare that the influence of
       magic and the effects of charms are purely imaginary and phantasmical. A third class of writers
       maintain that the effects said to be wrought by magic spells are altogether illusory and fanciful,
       although it may be that the devil does really lend his aid to some witch.
             The errors held by each one of these persons may thus be set forth and thus confuted. For in
       the very first place they are shown to be plainly heretical by many orthodox writers, and especially
       by S. Thomas, who lays down that such an opinion is altogether contrary to the authority of the
       saints and is founded upon absolute infidelity. Because the authority of the Holy Scriptures says
       that devils have power over the bodies and over the minds of men, when God allows them to
       exercise this power, as is plain from very many passages in the Holy Scriptures. Therefore those
       err who say that there is no such thing as witchcraft, but that it is purely imaginary, even although
       they do not believe that devils exist except in the imagination of the ignorant and vulgar, and the
       natural accidents which happen to a man he wrongly attributes to some supposed devil. For the
       imagination of some men is so vivid that they think they see actual figures and appearances which
       are but the reflection of their thoughts, and then these are believed to be the apparitions of evil
       spirits or even the spectres of witches. But this is contrary to the true faith, which teaches us that
       certain angels fell from heaven and are now devils, and we are bound to acknowledge that by their
       very nature they can do many wonderful things which we cannot do. And those who try to induce
       others to perform such evil wonders are called witches. And because infidelity in a person who has
       been baptized is technically called heresy, therefore such persons are plainly heretics.
             As regards those who hold the other two errors, those, that is to say, who do not deny that
       there are demons and that demons possess a natural power, but who differ among themselves
       concerning the possible effects of magic and the possible operations of witches: the one school
       holding that a witch can truly bring about certain effects, yet these effects are not real but
       phantastical, the other school allowing that some real harm does befall the person or persons
       injured, but that when a witch imagines this damage is the effect of her arts she is grossly

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_01a.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:02:39 PM]
Part I, Question I - P.1

       deceived. This error seems to be based upon two passages from the Canons where certain women
       are condemned who falsely imagine that during the night they ride abroad with Diana or Herodias.
       This may read in the Canon. Yet because such things often happen by illusion are merely in the
       imagination, those who suppose that all the effects of witchcraft are mere illusion and imagination
       are very greatly deceived. Secondly, with regard to a man who believes or maintains that a creature
       can be made, or changed for better or for worse, or transformed into some other kind or likeness by
       anyone save by God, the Creator of all things, alone, is an infidel and worse than a heathen.
       Wherefore on account of these words “changed for the worse” they say that such an effect if
       wrought by witchcraft cannot be real but must be purely phantastical.
              But inasmuch as these errors savour of heresy and contradict the obvious meaning of the
       Canon, we will first prove our points by the divine law, as also by ecclesiastical and civil law, and
       first in general.
              To commence, the expressions of the Canon must be treated of in detail (although the sense
       of the Canon will be even more clearly elucidated in the following question). For the divine in
       many places commands that witches are not only to be avoided, but also they are to be put to
       death, and it would not impose the extreme penalty of this kind if witches did not really and truly
       make a compact with devils in order to bring about real and true hurts and harms. For the penalty
       of death is not inflicted except for some grave and notorious crime, but it is otherwise with death
       of the soul, which can be brought about by the power of a phantastical illusion or even by the
       stress of temptation. This is the opinion of S. Thomas when he discusses whether it be evil to make
       use of the help of devils (ii. 7). For in the 18th chapter of Deuteronomy it is commanded that all
       wizards and charmers are to be destroyed. Also the 19th chapter of Leviticus says: The soul which
       goeth to wizards and soothsayers to commit fornication with them, I will set my face against that
       soul, and destroy it out of the midst of my people. And again, 20: A man, or woman, in whom
       there is a pythonical or divining spirit dying, let them die: they shall stone them. Those persons are
       said to be pythons in whom the devil works extraordinary things.
              Moreover, this must be borne in mind, that on account of this sin Ochozias fell sick and died,
       IV. Kings I. Also Saul, I Paralipomenon, 10. We have, moreover, the weighty opinions of the
       Fathers who have written upon the scriptures and who have treated at length of the power of
       demons and of magic arts. The writings of many doctors upon Book 2 of the Sentences may be
       consulted, and it will be found that they all agree, that there are wizards and sorcerers who by the
       power of the devil can produce real and extraordinary effects, and these effects are not imaginary,
       and God permits this to be. I will not mention those very many other places where S. Thomas in
       great detail discusses operations of this kind. As, for example, in his Summa contra Gentiles, Book
       3, c. 1 and 2, in part one, question 114, argument 4. And in the Second of the Second, questions 92
       and 94. We may further consult the Commentators and the Exegetes who have written upon the
       wise men and the magicians of Pharao, Exodus vii. We may also consult what S. Augustine says in
       The City of God, Book 18, c. 17. See further his second book On Christian Doctrine. Very many
       other doctors advance the same opinion, and it would be the height of folly for any man to
       contradict all these, and he could not be held to be clear of the guilt of heresy. For any man who
       gravely errs in an exposition of Holy Scripture is rightly considered to be a heretic. And
       whosoever thinks otherwise concerning these matters which touch the faith that the Holy Roman
       Church holds is a heretic. There is the Faith.
                                                                Page 1 of 3


file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_01a.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:02:39 PM]
Part I, Question I - P.1

                                                  Question I continued . . .

                                                           Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                           HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                   All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_01a.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:02:39 PM]
Notes

           “Diana or Herodias.” This decree, which was often attributed to a General Council of Ancyra,
        but which is now held to be of a later date, was in any case authoritative, since it passed into the
        “De ecclesiasticis disciplinis” ascribed to Regino of Prum (906), and thence to the canonists S.
        Ivo of Chartres and Johannes Gratian. Section 364 of the Benedictine Abbot's work relates that
        “certain abandoned women turning aside to follow Satan, being seduced by the illusions and
        phantasms of demons, believe and openly profess that in the dead of night they ride upon certain
        beasts with the pagan goddess Dianan and a countless horde of women, and that in these silent
        hours they fly over vast tracks of country and obey her as their mistress, while on other nights they
        are sullen to pay her homage.” John of Salisbury, who died in 1180, in his “Policraticus,” I, xvii,
        speaks of the popular belief in a witch-queen named Herodias, who called together the sorcerers
        to meeting at night. In a MS., “De Sortilegis,” the following passage occurs: “We next inquire
        concerning certain wicked crones who believe and profess that in the night-time they ride abroad
        with Diana, the heathen goddess, or else with Herodias, and an innumerable host of women, upon
        certain beasts, and that in a silent covey at the dead of night they pass over immense distances,
        obeying her commands as their mistress, and that they are summoned by her on appointed nights,
        and they declare that they have the power to change human beings for better or for worse, ay,
        even to turn them into some other semblance or shape. Concerning such women I answer
        according to the decrees of the Council of Alexandria, that the minds of the faithful are disordered
        by such fantasies owing to the inspiration of no good spirit but of the devil.”




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0001.html [2002-01-20 12:02:39 PM]
Part I, Question I - P.2


                                   THE
                           MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                        PART I.
                                               QUESTION I. CONTINUED . . . .

             That to deny the existence of witches is contrary to the obvious sense of the Canon is shown
       by ecclesiastical law. For we have the opinions of the commentators on the Canon which
       commences: If anyone by magic arts or witchcraft . . . And again, there are those writers who
       speak of men impotent and bewitched, and therefore by this impediment brought about by
       witchcraft they are unable to copulate, and so the contract of marriage is rendered void and
       matrimony in their cases has become impossible. For they say, and S. Thomas agrees with them,
       that if witchcraft takes effect in the event of a marriage before there has been carnal copulation,
       then if it is lasting it annuls and destroys the contract of marriage, and it is quite plain that such a
       condition cannot in any way be said to be illusory and the effect of imagination.
             Upon this point see what Blessed Henry of Segusio has so fully written in his Summa: also
       Godfrey of Fontaine and S. Raymond of Peñafort, who have discussed this question in detail very
       clearly, not asking whether such a physical condition could be thought imaginary and unreal, but
       taking it to be an actual and proven fact, and then they lay down whether it is to be treated as a
       lasting or temporary infirmity if it continued for more than the space of three years, and they do
       not doubt that it may be brought about by the power of witchcraft, although it is true that this
       condition may be intermittent. But what is a fact beyond dispute is that such impotency can be
       brought about through the power of the devil by means of a contract made with him, or even by
       the devil himself without the assistance of any witch, although this most rarely happens in the
       Church, since marriage is a most excellent sacrament. But amongst Pagans this actually does
       happen, and this is because evil spirits act as if they had a certain legitimate dominion over them,
       as Peter of Palude in his fourth book relates, when he tells of the young man who had pledged
       himself in wedlock to a certain idol, and who nevertheless in the Church the devil prefers to
       operate through the medium of witches and to bring about such effects for his own gain, that is to
       say, for the loss of souls. And in what manner he is able to do this, and by what means, will be
       discussed a little later, where we shall treat of the seven ways of doing harm to men by similar
       operations. And of the other questions which Theologians and Canonists have raised with
       reference to these points, one is very important, since they discuss how such impotence can be
       cured and whether it is permissible to cure it by some counter-charm, and what is to be done if the
       witch who cast the spell is dead, a circumstance of which Godfrey of Fontaines treats in his
       Summa. And these questions will be amply elucidated in the Third Part of this work.
             This then is the reason why the Canonists have so carefully drawn up a table of the various
       differing penalties, making a distinction between private and open practice of witchcraft, or rather
       of divination, since this foul superstition has various species and degrees, so that anyone who is
       notoriously given to it must be refused Communion. If it be secretly practised the culprit must do
       penance for forty days. And if he be a cleric he is to be suspended and confined in a monastery. If
       he be a layman he shall be excommunicated, wherefore all such infamous persons must be

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_01b.html (1 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:02:40 PM]
Part I, Question I - P.2

       punished, together with all those who resort to them, and no excuse at all is to be allowed.
             The same penalty too is prescribed by the civil law. For Azo, in his Summa upon Book 9 of
       the Codex, the rubric concerning sorcerers, 2 after the lex Cornelia, concerning assassins and
       murderers, lays down: Let it be known that all those who are commonly called sorcerers, and those
       too who are skilled in the art of divination, incur the penalty of death. The same penalty is
       enforced yet again. For this is the exact sentence of these laws: It is unlawful for any man to
       practise divination; and is he does so his reward shall be death by the sword of the executioner.
       There are others too who by their magic charms endeavour to take the lives of innocent people,
       who turn the passions of women to lusts of every kind, and these criminals are to be thrown to the
       wild beasts. And the laws allow that any witness whatsoever is to be admitted as evidence against
       them. This the Canon treating of the defence of the Faith explicitly enjoins. And the same
       procedure is allowable in a charge of heresy. When such an accusation is brought, any witness may
       come forward to give evidence, just as he may in a case of lese-majesty. For witchcraft is high
       treason against God's Majesty. And so they are to be put to the torture in order to make them
       confess. Any person, whatsoever his rank or position, upon such an accusation may be put to the
       torture, and he who is found guilty, even if he confesses his crime, let him be racked, let him suffer
       all other tortures prescribed by law in order that he may be punished in proportion to his offences.
             Note: In days of old such criminals suffered a double penalty and were often thrown to wild
       beast to be devoured by them. Nowadays they are burnt at the stake, and probably this is because
       the majority of them are women.
             The civil law also forbids any conniving at or joining in such practices, for it did not allow a
       diviner even to enter another person's house; and often it ordered that all their possessions should
       be burnt, nor was anyone allowed to patronize or to consult them; very often they were deported to
       some distant and deserted island and all their goods sold by public auction. Moreover, those who
       consulted or resorted to witches were punished with exile and the confiscation of all their property.
       These penalties were set in operation by the common consent of all nations and rulers, and they
       have greatly conduced to the suppression of the practice of such forbidden arts.
             It should be observed that the laws highly commend those who seek to nullify the charms of
       witches. And those who take great pains that the work of man shall not be harmed by the force
       tempests or by hailstorms are worthy of a great reward rather than of any punishment. How such
       damage may lawfully be prevented will be discussed in full below. Accordingly, how can it be that
       the denial or frivolous contradiction of any of these propositions can be free from the mark of
       some notable heresy? Let every man judge for himself unless indeed his ignorance excuse him.
       But what sort of ignorance may excuse him we shall very shortly proceed to explain. From what
       has been already said we draw the following conclusion; It is a most certain and most Catholic
       opinion that there are sorcerers and witches who by the help of the devil, on account of a compact
       which they have entered into with him, are able, since God allows this, to produce real and actual
       evils and harm, which does not render it unlikely that they can also bring about visionary and
       phantastical illusions by some extraordinary and peculiar means. The scope of the present inquiry,
       however, is witchcraft, and this very widely differs from these other arts, and therefore a
       consideration of them would be nothing to the purpose, since those who practise them may with
       greater accuracy be termed fortune-tellers and soothsayers rather than sorcerers.
             It must particularly be noticed that these two last errors are founded upon a complete
       misunderstanding of the words of the Canon (I will not speak of the first error, which stands
       obviously self-condemned, since it is clean contrary to the teaching of Holy Scripture). And so let


file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_01b.html (2 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:02:40 PM]
Part I, Question I - P.2

       us proceed to a right understanding of the Canon. And first we will speak against the first error,
       which says that the mean is mere illusion although the two extremes are realities.
             Here it must be noticed that there are fourteen distinct species which come under the genus
       superstition, but these for the sake of brevity it is hardly necessary to detail, since they have been
       most clearly set out by S. Isidore in his Etymologiae, Book 8, and by S. Thomas in his Second of
       the Second, question 92. Moreover, there will be explicit mention of these rather lower when we
       discuss the gravity of this heresy, and this will be in the last question of our First Part.
             The category in which women of this sort are to be ranked is called the category of Pythons,
       persons in or by whom the devil either speaks or performs some astonishing operation, and this is
       often the first category in order. But the category under which sorcerers come is called the
       category of Sorcerers.
             And inasmuch as these persons differ greatly one from another, it would not be correct that
       they should not be comprised in that species under which so many others are confined: Wherefore,
       since the Canon makes explicit mention of certain women, but does not in so many words speak of
       witches; therefore they are entirely wrong who understand the Canon only to speak of imaginary
       voyages and goings to and fro in the body and who wish to reduce every kind of superstition to
       this illusion: for as those women are transported in their imagination, so are witches actually and
       bodily transported. And he who wishes to argue from this Canon that the effects of witchcraft, the
       infliction of disease or any sickness, are purely imaginary, utterly mistakes the tenor of the Canon,
       and errs most grossly.
             Further, it is to be observed that those who, whilst they allow the two extremes, that is to say,
       some operation of the devil and the effect, a sensible disease, to be actual and real, at the same
       time deny that any instrument is the means thereof; that is to say, they deny that any witch could
       have participated in such a cause and effect, these, I say, err most gravely: for, in philosophy, the
       mean must always partake of the nature of the two extremes.
             Moreover, it is useless to argue that any result of witchcraft may be a phantasy and unreal,
       because such a phantasy cannot be procured without resort to the power of the devil, and it is
       necessary that there should be made a contract with the devil, bu which contract the witch truly
       and actually binds herself to be the servant of the devil and devotes herself to the devil, and this is
       not done in any dream or under any illusion, but she herself bodily and truly co-operates with, and
       conjoins herself to, the devil. For this indeed is the end of all witchcraft; whether it be the casting
       of spells by a look or by a formula of words or by some other charm, it is all of the devil, as will be
       made clear in the following question.
             In truth, if anyone cares to read the words of the Canon, there are four points which must
       particularly strike him. And the first point is this: It is absolutely incumbent upon all who have the
       cure of souls, to teach their flocks that there is one, only, true God, and that to none other in
       Heaven or earth may worship by given. The second point is this, that although these women
       imagine they are riding (as they think and say) with Diana or with Herodias, in truth they are
       riding with the devil, who calls himself by some such heathen name and throws a glamour before
       their eyes. And the third point is this, that the act of riding abroad may be merely illusory, since
       the devil has extraordinary power over the minds of those who have given themselves up to him,
       so that what they do in pure imagination, they believe they have actually and really done in the
       body. And the fourth point is this: Witches have made a compact to obey the devil in all things,
       wherefore that the words of the Canon should be extended to include and comprise every act of
       witchcraft is absurd, since witches do much more than these women, and witches actually are of a


file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_01b.html (3 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:02:40 PM]
Part I, Question I - P.2

       very different kind.
             Whether witches by their magic arts are actually and bodily transported from place to place,
       or whether this merely happens in imagination, as is the case with regard to those women who are
       called Pythons, will be dealt with later in this work, and we shall also discuss how they are
       conveyed. So now we have explained two errors, at least, and we have arrived at a clear
       understanding of the sense of the Canon.
             Moreover, a third error, which mistaking the words of the Canon says that all magic arts are
       illusions, may be corrected from the very words of the Canon itself. For inasmuch as it says that he
       who believes any creature can be made or transformed for the better or the worse, or
       metamorphosed into some other species or likeness, save it be by the Creator of all things Himself,
       etc . . . . he is worse than an infidel. These three propositions, if they are thus understood as they
       might appear on the bare face of them, are clean contrary to the sense of Holy Scripture and the
       commentaries of the doctors of the Church. For the following Canon clearly says that creatures can
       be made by witches, although they necessarily must be very imperfect creatures, and probably in
       some way deformed. And it is plain that the sense of the Canon agrees with what S. Augustine
       tells us concerning the magicians at the court of Pharao, who turned their rods into serpents, as the
       holy doctor writes upon the 7th chapter of Exodus, ver. II, - and Pharao called the wise men and
       the magicians . . . . We may also refer to the commentaries of Strabo, who says that devils hurry up
       and down over the whole earth, when by their incantations witches are employing them at various
       operations, and these devils are able to collect various species to grow. We may also refer to
       Blessed Albertus Magnus, De animalibus. And also S. Thomas, Part I, question 114, article 4. For
       the sake of conciseness we will not quote them at length here, but this remains proven, that it is
       possible for certain creatures to be created in this way.
             With reference to the second point, that a creature may be changed for better or worse, it is
       always to be understood that this can only be done by the permission and indeed by the power of
       God, and that this is only done in order to correct or to punish, but that God very often allows
       devils to act as His ministers and His servants, but throughout all it is God alone who can afflict
       and it is He alone who can heal, for “I kill and I make alive” (Deuteronomy xxxii, 39). And so evil
       angels may and do perform the will of God. To this also S. Augustine bears witness when he says:
       There are in truth magic spells and evil charms, which not only often afflict men with diseases but
       even kill them outright. We must also endeavour clearly to understand what actually happens when
       nowadays by the power of the devil wizards and witches are changed into wolves and other savage
       beasts. The Canon, however, speaks of some bodily and lasting change, and does not discuss those
       extraordinary things which may be done by glamour of which S. Augustine speaks in the 18th
       book and the 17th chapter of Of the City of God, when he reports many strange tales of that
       famous witch Circe, and of the companions of Diomedes and of the father of Praestantius. This
       will be discussed in detail in the Second Part.
                                                                Page 2 of 3


                                                  Question I continued . . .

                                                           Main Index



file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_01b.html (4 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:02:40 PM]
Part I, Question I - P.2


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                           HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                   All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_01b.html (5 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:02:40 PM]
Notes

            “Blessed Henry.” Blessed Henry of Segusio, usually called Hostiensis, the famous Italian
        canonist of the thirteenth century, was born at Susa, and died at Lyons, 25 October, 1271. After a
        most distinguished career, on 4 December, 1261, he became Cardinal-Bishop of Ostia and
        Velletri, whence his name Hostiensis. His “Summa super titulis Decretalium” (Strasburg, 1512;
        Cologne, 1612; Venice, 1605), which was also known as “Summa aurea,” or “Summa
        archiepiscopi,” since it was written whilst he was Archbishop of Embrun, won for its author the
        title “Monarcha iuris, lumen lucidissimum Decretorum.” One portion of this work, the “Summa,
        siue Tractatus de poenitentia et remissionibus,” was very popular, and is continually referred to
        as of high authority. The book was written between 1250 and 1261.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0002.html [2002-01-20 12:02:40 PM]
Notes

           “Godfrey.” Godfrey of Fontaines, Doctor Uenerandus, scholastic philosopher and theologian,
        was born near Liège within the first half of the thirteenth century; he became a canon of his native
        diocese, and also of Paris and Cologne. In 1300 he was elected to the See of Tournai, which he
        declined. During the last quarter of the century he taught theology with great distinction at the
        University of Paris. His vast work, “XIV Quodlibeta,” which in manuscript was extensively
        studied in the mediaeval schools, has recently been pubished for the first time with an ample
        commentary.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0003.html [2002-01-20 12:02:40 PM]
Notes

           “S. Raymond.” One of the most distinguised names of the Dominican Order. Born in 1175, he
        professed Canon law at Barcelona and Bologna. At the request of his superiors he published his
        “Summa Casuum,” of which several editions appeared in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.
        His reputation as a jurist was so great that in 1230 he was called to Rome by Gregory IX, who
        directed him to rearrange and condify the ecclesiastical canons. Having completed the work, he
        refused all honours, and returned to Spain. He died at Barcelona, 6 January, 1275. His feast is
        celebrated on 23 January.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0004.html [2002-01-20 12:02:40 PM]
Notes

          “Peter of Palude.” Peter of Palude, who died 1342, of the Order of S. Dominic, was one of the
        most distinguished Thomistic theologians during the first half of the fourteenth century.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0005.html [2002-01-20 12:02:41 PM]
Notes

           “Azo.” Early in the thirteenth century Portius Azo stood at the head of the Bolognese school of
        law which was accomplishing the resuscitation of the classical Roman law. He was the pupil of the
        celebrated Johannes Bassianus, and his fame so eclipsed all his contemporaries that in 1205
        Thomas of Marlborough, afterwards Abbot of Evesham, spent six months at Bologna hearing his
        lectures every day. Azo was saluted as “Master of all the Masters of the laws,” and the highest
        praise that could be given another canonist was to declare him to be “second only to Azo.”
        Savigrey says that Azo was alive as late as 1230. His chief work is a “Summa” of the first nine
        books of the Code, to which he added a “Summa” of the Institutes. No less than thirty-one editions
        appeared between 1482 and 1610; of which five are earler than 1500. Throughout the Middle
        Ages these treatises were in highest respute.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0006.html [2002-01-20 12:02:41 PM]
Notes

           “Lex Cornelia.” De Sicariis et Ueneficis. Passed circa 8I B.C. This law dealt with incendiarism
        as well as open assassination and poisoning, and laid down penalties for accessories to the fact.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0007.html [2002-01-20 12:02:41 PM]
Notes

           “St. Isidore.” The “Etymologiae,” or “Origines” as it is sometimes called, must be regarded
        as the most important and best known of the works of S. Isidore of Seville, born circa 560; died 4
        April, 636. It has been described as “a vast storehouse in which is gathered, systematized, and
        condensed, all the learning possessed by that time.” Throughout the greater part of the Middle
        Ages it was the text-book most in use in educational institutions. Arevalo, who is regarded as the
        most authoritive editor of S. Isidore (7 vols., Rome, 1797-1803), tells us that it was printed no less
        than ten times between 1470 and 1529.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0008.html [2002-01-20 12:02:41 PM]
Notes

           “Blessed Albertus.” Albert the Great, the Dominican doctor, scientist, philosopher, and
        theologian. Born circa 1206; died at Cologne, 15 November, 1280. He is called “the Great” and
        “Doctor Universalis” on account of his extraordinary genius and encyclopaedic knowledge, for he
        surpassed all his contemporaries in every branch of learning cultivated in his day. He is certainly
        one of the glories of the Order of Preachers. Ulrich Endelbert speaks of him as: “Uir in omni
        scientia adeo divinus, ut nostri temporis stupor et miraculum congrue vocari possit” (“De summo
        bono,” III, iv). Perhaps at the present day his extraordinary genius is not sufficiently recognized,
        for he was certainly one of the most learned men of all time. The latest edition of his complete
        works, Paris (Louis Vives), 1890-99, in thity-eight quarto volumes, was published under the
        direction of the Abbé Auguste Borgnet, of the diocese of Reims. “De animalibbus” will be found in
        Vols. XI-XII. The feast of Albertus Magnus is celebrated on 15 November. He was beatified by
        Gregory XV in 1622, so in this translation I call him “Blessed” by anticipation.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0009.html [2002-01-20 12:02:42 PM]
Part I, Question I - P.3


                                   THE
                           MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                        PART I.
                                               QUESTION I. CONTINUED . . . .
                                  Whether it be a Heresy to Maintain that Witches Exist.

             The second part of our inquiry is this, whether obstinately to maintain that witches exist is
       heretical. The questions arises whether people who hold that witches do not exist are to be
       regarded as notorious heretics, or whether they are to be regarded as gravely suspect of holding
       heretical opinions. It seems that the first opinion is the correct one. For this is undoubtedly in
       accordance with the opinion of the learned Bernard. And yet those persons who openly and
       obstinately persevere in heresy must be proved to be heretics by unshaken evidence, and such
       demonstration is generally one of three kinds; either a man has openly preached and proclaimed
       heretical doctrines; or he is proved to be a heretic by the evidence of trustworthy witnesses; or he
       is proved to be a heretic by his own free confession. And yet there are some who rashly opposing
       themselves to all authority publicly proclaim that witches do not exist, or at any rate that they can
       in no way afflict and hurt mankind. Wherefore, strictly speaking those who are convicted of such
       evil doctrine may be excommunicated, since they are openly and unmistakably to be convicted of
       false doctrine. The reader may consult the works of Bernard, where he will find that this sentence
       is just, right, and true. Yet perhaps this may seem to be altogether too severe a judgement mainly
       because of the penalties which follow upon excommunication: for the Canon prescribes that a
       cleric is to be degraded and that a layman is to be handed over to the power of the secular courts,
       who are admonished to punish him as his offence deserves. Moreover, we must take into
       consideration the very great numbers of persons who, owing to their ignorance, will surely be
       found guilty of this error. And since the error is very common the rigor of strict justice may be
       tempered with mercy. And it is indeed our intention to try to make excuses for those who are
       guilty of this heresy rather than to accuse them of being infected with the malice of heresy. It is
       preferable then that if a man should be even gravely suspected of holding this false opinion he
       should not be immediately condemned for the grave crime of heresy. (See the gloss of Bernard
       upon the word Condemned.) One may in truth proceed against such a man as against a person who
       is gravely suspect, but he is not to be condemned in his absence and without a hearing. And yet the
       suspicion may be very grave, and we cannot refrain from suspecting these people, for their
       frivolous assertions do certainly seem to affect the purity of the faith. For there are three kinds of
       suspicion - a light suspicion, a serious suspicion, and a grave suspicion. These are treated of in the
       chapter on Accusations and in the chapter on Contumacy, Book 6, on Heretics. And these things
       come under the cognizance of the archidiaconal court. Reference may also be made to the
       commentaries of Giovanni d'Andrea, and in particular to his glosses upon the phrases Accused;
       Gravely suspect; and his note upon a presumption of heresy. It is certain too that some who lay
       down the law on this subject do not realize that they are holding false doctrines and errors, for
       there are many who have no knowledge of the Canon law, and there are some who, owing to the
       fact that they are badly informed and insufficiently read, waver in their opinions and cannot make

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_01c.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:02:42 PM]
Part I, Question I - P.3

       up their minds, and since an idea merely kept to oneself is not heresy unless it be afterwards put
       forward, obstinately and openly maintained, it should certainly be said that persons such as we
       have just mentioned are not to be openly condemned for the crime of heresy. But let no man think
       he may escape by pleading ignorance. For those who have gone astray through ignorance of this
       kind may be found to have sinned very gravely. For although there are many degrees of ignorance,
       nevertheless those who have the cure of souls cannot plead invincible ignorance, as the
       philosophers call it, which by the writers on Canon law and by the Theologians is called Ignorance
       of the Fact. But what is to be blamed in these persons is Universal ignorance, that is to say, an
       ignorance of the divine law, which, as Pope Nicholas has laid down, they must and should know.
       For he says: The dispensation of these divine teachings is entrusted to our charge: and woe be unto
       us if we do not sow the good seed, woe be unto us if we do not teach our flocks. And so those who
       have the charge of souls are bound to have a sound knowledge of the Sacred Scriptures. It is true
       that according to Raymond of Sabunde and S. Thomas, those who have the cure of souls are
       certainly not bound to be men of any extraordinary learning, but they certainly should have a
       competent knowledge, that is to say, knowledge sufficient to carry out the duties of their state.
             And yet, and this may be some small consolation to them, the theoretical severity of law is
       often balanced by the actual practice, and they may know that this ignorance of the Canon law,
       although sometimes it may be culpable and worthy of blame, is considered from two points of
       view. For sometimes persons do not know, they do not wish to know, and they have no intention
       of knowing. For such persons there is no excuse, but they are to be altogether condemned. And of
       these the Psalmist speaks: He would not understand in order that he might do good. But secondly,
       there are those who are ignorant, yet not from any desire not to know. And this diminishes the
       gravity of the sin, because there is no actual consent of the will. And such a case is this, when
       anyone ought to know something, but cannot realize that he ought to know it, as S. Paul says in his
       1st Epistle to Timothy (i.13): But I obtained the mercy of God, because I did it ignorantly in
       unbelief. And this is technically said to be an ignorance, which indirectly at least is the fault of the
       person, insomuch as on account of many of occupations he neglects to inform himself of matters
       which he ought to know, and he does not use any endeavour to make himself acquainted with
       them, and this ignorance does not entirely excuse him, but it excuses him to a certain degree. So S.
       Ambrose, writing upon that passage in the Romans (ii, 4): Knowest thou not, that the benignity of
       God leadeth thee to penance? says, If thou dost not know through thine own fault then thy sin is
       very great and grievous. More especially then in these days, when souls are beset with so many
       dangers, we must take measures to dispel all ignorance, and we must always have before our eyes
       that sever judgement which will be passed upon us if we do not use, everyone according to his
       proper ability, the one talent which has been given. In this way our ignorance will be neither thick
       nor stupid, for metaphorically we speak of men as thick and stupid who do not see what lies
       directly in their very way.
             And in the Flores regularum moralium the Roman Chancellor commenting upon the second
       rule says: A culpable ignorance of the Divine law does not of necessity affect the ignorant person.
       The reason is this: the Holy Spirit is able directly to instruct a man in all that knowledge essential
       to salvation, if these things are too difficult for him to grasp unaided by his own natural intellect.
             The answer to the first objection then is a clear and correct understanding of the Canon. To
       the second objection Peter of Tarentaise (Blessed Innocent V) replies: No doubt the devil, owing
       to his malice which he harbours against the human race, would destroy mankind if he were
       allowed by God to do so. The fact that God allows him sometimes to do harm and that sometimes

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_01c.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:02:42 PM]
Part I, Question I - P.3

       God hinders and prevents him, manifestly brings the devil into more open contempt and loathing,
       since in all things, to the manifestation of His glory, God is using the devil, unwilling though he
       be, as a servant and slave. With regard to the third objection, that the infliction of sickness or some
       other harm is always the result of human effort, whereby the witch submits her will to evil, and so
       actually as any other evil-doer, by the volition of her will can afflict some person or bring about
       some damage or perform some villainous act. If it be asked whether the movement of material
       objects from place to place by the devil may be paralleled by the movement of the spheres, the
       answer is No. Because material objects are not thus moved by any natural inherent power of their
       own, but they are only moved by a certain obedience to the power of the devil, who by the virtue
       of his own nature has a certain dominion over bodies and material things; he has this certain
       power, I affirm, yet he is not able to add to created material objects any form or shape, be it
       substantial or accidental, without some admixture of or compounding with another created natural
       object. But since, by the will of God, he is able to move material objects from place to place, then
       by the conjunction of various objects he can produce disease or some circumstance such as he will.
       Wherefore the spells and effects of witchcraft are not governed by the movement of the spheres,
       nor is the devil himself thus governed, inasmuch as he may often make use of these conditions to
       do him service.
             The answer to the fourth objection. The work of God can be destroyed by the work of the
       devil in accordance with what we are now saying with reference to the power and effects of
       witchcraft. But since this can only be by the permission of God, it does not at all follow that the
       devil is stronger than God. Again, he cannot use so much violence as he wishes to harm the works
       of God, because if he were unrestricted he would utterly destroy all the works of God.
             The answer to the fifth objection may be clearly stated thus: The planets and stars have no
       power to coerce and compel devils to perform any actions against their will, although seemingly
       demons are readier to appear when summoned by magicians under the influence of certain stars. It
       appears that they do this for two reasons. First, because they know that the power of that planet
       will aid the effect which the magicians desire. Secondly, They do this in order to deceive men,
       thus making them suppose that the stars have some divine power or actual divinity, and we know
       that in days of old this veneration of the stars led to the vilest idolatry.
            With reference to the last objection, which is founded upon the argument that gold is made by
       alchemists, we may put forward the opinion of S. Thomas when he discusses the power of the
       devil and how he works: Although certain forms having a substance may be brought about by art
       and the power of a natural agent, as, for example, the form fire is brought about by art employed
       on wood: nevertheless, this cannot be done universally, because art cannot always either find or
       yet mix together the proper proportions, and yet it can produce something similar. And thus
       alchemists make something similar to gold, that is to say, in so far as the external accidents are
       concerned, but nevertheless they do not make true gold, because the substance of gold is not
       formed by the heat of fire which alchemists employ, but by the heat of the sun, acting and reacting
       upon a certain spot where mineral power is concentrated and amassed, and therefore such gold is
       of the same likeness as, but is not of the same species as, natural gold. And the same argument
       applies to all their other operations.
             This then is our proposition: devils by their act do bring about evil effects through witchcraft,
       yet it is true that without the assistance of some agent they cannot make any form, either
       substantial or accidental, and we do not maintain that they can inflict damage without the

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_01c.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:02:42 PM]
Part I, Question I - P.3

       assistance of some agent, but with such an agent diseases, and any other human passions or
       ailments, can be brought about, and these are real and true. How these agents or how the
       employment of such means can be rendered effective in co-operation with devils will be made
       clear in the following chapters.
                                                                Page 3 of 3


                                                              Question II

                                                           Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                           HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                   All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_01c.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:02:42 PM]
Notes

           “Bernard.” Junior, or Modernus, a canonist who lived in the middle of the thirteenth century,
        called “Compostellanus” from the fact that he possessed an ecclesiastical benefice in
        Compostella. He was also known as Brignadius from his birthplace in Galicia, Spain. Bernard
        was chaplain to Innocent IV, who reigned 1243-54, and was himself a noted canonist. Bernard's
        Commentaries on Canon law are very copius and very celebrated. He is termed Modernus to
        distinguish him from Bernard Antiquus, a canonist of the early thirteenth century, a native of
        Compostella, who became Professor of Canon law in the University of Bologna.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0010.html [2002-01-20 12:02:42 PM]
Notes

           “Giovanni d'Andrea.” This distinguished canonist was born at Mugello, near Florence, about
        1275; died 1348. He was educated at the University of Bologna, where he afterwards became
        Professor of Canon law. He had previously taught at Padua and Pisa, and his career as a lecturer
        extended for nearly half a century. His works are “Glossarium in VI decretalium librum,” Venice
        and Lyons, 1472; “Glossarium in Clementinas”; “Nouella, siue Commentarius in decretales
        epistolas Gregorii IX,” Venice, 1581; “Mercuriales, siue commentarius in regulas sexti”; “Liber
        de laudibus S. Hieronymi”; “Additamenta ad speculum Durand” (1347).




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0011.html [2002-01-20 12:02:43 PM]
Notes

           “Pope Nicholas.” Nicholas V, 1397-1455, the great patron of learning.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0012.html [2002-01-20 12:02:43 PM]
Notes

           “Raymond of Sabunde.” Born at Barcelona, Spain, towards the end of the fourteenth century;
        died 1432. From 1430 to his death he taught theology, philosophy, and medicine at the University
        of Toulouse. Of his many works only one remains, “Theologia Naturalis.” It was first written in
        Spanish, and translated into Latin at various times: December, 1487; Strasburg, 1496; Paris,
        1509; Venice, 1581, etc. Montaigne, who translated the book into French, Paris, 1569, bears
        witness to the extraordinary popularity it enjoyed in his own day.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0013.html [2002-01-20 12:02:43 PM]
Notes

           “S. Ambrose.” On désigne depuis le XVI siècle sous le nom d'Ambrosiaster )=
        psuedo-Ambroise) l'auteur anonyme d'un commentair sur les Epîtres de saint Paul (à l'exclusion
        de Epître aux Hébreux), qui au moyenâge, peut-être même dès l'époque de Cassiodore, fut imputé
        inexactement à saint Ambroise. Cette paraphrase est tout à fait remarquable; c'est l'une des plus
        intéressantes que l'antiquité chrétienne nous ait léguées.” Labriolle, “Histoire de la Litterérature
        Latine Chrétienne,” c. III.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0014.html [2002-01-20 12:02:43 PM]
Notes

           “Innocent V.” Petrus a Tarentasia, born in Tarentaise, towards 1225, elected at Arezzo, 21
        January, 1276; died at Rome, 22 June, 1276. At the age of sixteen he joined the Dominican Order,
        and he won great distinction as a Professor at the University of Paris, whence he is known as
        Doctor Famosissimus. He is the author of several works dealing with philosophy, theology, and
        Canon law, some of which are still unpublished. The principal of these is the “Commentary on the
        Sentences of Peter Lombard.” I have used the edition, Toulouse, 1652.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0015.html [2002-01-20 12:02:43 PM]
Part I, Question II - P.1


                                    THE
                            MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                               PART I.
                                                             QUESTION II.

             If it be in accordance with the Catholic Faith to maintain that in order to bring about some
       effect of magic, the devil must intimately co-operate with the witch, or whether one without the
       other, that is to say, the devil without the witch, or conversely, could produce such an effect.
             And the first argument is this: That the devil can bring about an effect of magic without the
       co-operation of any witch. So S. Augustine holds. All things which visibly happen so that they can
       be seen, may (it is believed) be the work of the inferior powers of the air. But bodily ills and
       ailments are certainly not invisible, nay rather, they are evident to the senses, therefore they can be
       brought about by devils. Moreover, we learn from the Holy Scriptures of the disasters which fell
       upon Job, how fire fell from heaven and striking the sheep and the servants consumed them, and
       how a violent wind threw down the four corners of a house so that it fell upon his children and
       slew them all. The devil by himself without the co-operation of any witches, but merely by God's
       permission alone, was able to bring about all these disasters. Therefore he can certainly do many
       things which are often ascribed to the work of witches.
             And this is obvious from the account of the seven husbands of the maiden Sara, whom a devil
       killed. Moreover, whatever a superior power is able to do, it is able to do without reference to a
       power superior to it, and a superior power can all the more work without reference to an inferior
       power. But an inferior power can cause hailstorms and bring about diseases without the help of a
       power greater than itself. For Blessed Albertus Magnus in his work De passionibus aeris says that
       rotten sage, if used as he explains, and thrown into running water, will arouse most fearful
       tempests and storms.
             Moreover, it may be said that the devil makes use of a witch, not because he has need of any
       such agent, but because he is seeking the perdition of the witch. We may refer to what Aristotle
       says in the 3rd book of his Ethics. Evil is a voluntary act which is proved by the fact that nobody
       performs an unjust action, and a man who commits a rape does this for the sake of pleasure, not
       merely doing evil for evil's sake. Yet the law punishes those who have done evil as if they had
       acted merely for the sake of doing evil. Therefore if the devil works by means of a witch he is
       merely employing an instrument; and since an instrument depends upon the will of the person who
       employs it and does not act of its own free will, therefore the guilt of the action ought not to be
       laid to the charge of the witch, and in consequence she should not be punished.
             But an opposite opinion holds that the devil cannot so easily and readily do harm by himself
       to mankind, as he can harm them through the instrumentality of witches, although they are his
       servants. In the first place we may consider the act of generation. But for every act which has an
       effect upon another some kind of contact must be established, and because the devil, who is a
       spirit, can have no such actual contact with a human body, since there is nothing common of this
       kind between them, therefore he uses some human instruments, and upon these he bestows the
       power of hurting by bodily touch. And many hold this to be proven by the text, and the gloss upon

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_02a.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:02:44 PM]
Part I, Question II - P.1

       the text, in the 3rd chapter of S. Paul's Epistle to the Galatians: O senseless Galatians, who hath
       bewitched you that you should not obey the truth? And the gloss upon this passage refers to those
       who have singularly fiery and baleful eyes, who by a mere look can harm others, especially young
       children. And Avicenna also bears this out, Naturalism, Book 3, c. the last, when he says; “Very
       often the soul may have as much influence upon the body of another to the same extent as it has
       upon its own body, for such is the influence of the eyes of anyone who by his glance attracts and
       fascinates another.” And the same opinion is maintained by Al-Gazali in the 5th book and 10th c.
       of his Physics. Avicenna also suggests, although he does not put this opinion forward as
       irrefutable, that the power of the imagination can actually change or seem to change extraneous
       bodies, in cases where the power of the imagination is too unrestrained; and hence we father that
       the power of the imagination is not to be considered as distinct from a man's other sensible powers,
       since it is common to them all, but to some extent it includes all those other powers. And this is
       true, because such a power of the imagination can change adjacent bodies, as, for example, when a
       man is able to walk along some narrow beam which is stretched down the middle of a street. But
       yet if this beam were suspended over deep water he would not dare to walk along it, because his
       imagination would most strongly impress upon his mind the idea of falling, and therefore his body
       and the power of his limbs would not obey his imagination, and they would not obey the contrary
       thereto, that is to say, walking directly and without hesitation. This change may be compared to the
       influence exercised by the eyes of a person who has such influence, and so a mental change is
       brought about although there is not any actual and bodily change.
             Moreover, if it be argued that such a change is cause by a living body owing to the influence
       of the mind upon some other living body, this answer may be given. In the presence of a murderer
       blood flows from the wounds in the corpse of the person he has slain. Therefore without any
       mental powers bodies can produce wonderful effects, and so a living man if he pass by near the
       corpse of a murdered man, although he may not be aware of the dead body, is often seized with
       fear.
             Again, there are some things in nature which have certain hidden powers, the reason for
       which man does not know; such, for example, is the lodestone, which attracts steel and many other
       such things, which S. Augustine mentions in the 20th book Of the City of God.
            And so women in order to bring about changes in the bodies of others sometimes make use of
       certain things, which exceed our knowledge, but this is without any aid from the devil. And
       because these remedies are mysterious we must not therefore ascribe them to the power of the
       devil as we should ascribe evil spells wrought by witches.
            Moreover, witches use certain images and other strange periapts, which they are wont to place
       under the lintels of the doors of houses, or in those meadows where flocks are herding, or even
       where men congregate, and thus they cast spells over their victims, who have oft-times been
       known to die. But because such extraordinary effects can proceed from these images it would
       appear that the influence of these images is in proportion to the influence of the stars over human
       bodies, for as natural bodies are influenced by heavenly bodies, so may artificial bodies likewise
       be thus influenced. But natural bodies may find the benefit of certain secret but good influences.
       Therefore artificial bodies may receive such influence. Hence it is plain that those who perform
       works of healing may well perform them by means of such good influences, and this has no
       connexion at all with any evil power.
               Moreover, it would seem that most extraordinary and miraculous events come to pass by the

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_02a.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:02:44 PM]
Part I, Question II - P.1

       working of the power of nature. For wonderful and terrible and amazing things happen owing to
       natural forces. And this S. Gregory points out in his Second Dialogue. The Saints perform
       miracles, sometimes by a prayer, sometimes by their power alone. There are examples of each; S.
       Peter by praying raised to life Tabitha, who was dead. By rebuking Ananias and Sapphira, who
       were telling a lie, he slew the without any prayer. Therefore a man by his mental influence can
       change a material body into another, or he can change such a body from health to sickness and
       conversely.
             Moreover, the human body is nobler than any other body, but because of the passions of the
       mind the human body changes and becomes hot or cold, as is the case with angry men or men who
       are afraid: and so even greater change takes place with regard to the effects of sickness and death,
       which by their power can greatly change a material body.
             But certain objections must be allowed. The influence of the mind cannot make an impression
       upon any form except by the intervention of some agent, as we have said above. And these are the
       words of S. Augustine in the book which we have already quoted: It is incredible that the angels
       who fell from Heaven should be obedient to any material things, for the obey God only. And much
       less can a man of his natural power bring about extraordinary and evil effects. The answer must be
       made, there are even to-day many who err greatly on this point, making excuses for witches and
       laying the whole blame upon the craft of the devil, or ascribing the changes that they work to some
       natural alteration. These errors may be easily made clear. First, by the description of witches which
       S. Isidore gives in his Etymologiae, c. 9: Witches are so called on account of the blackness of their
       guilt, that is to say, their deeds are more evil than those of any other malefactors. He continues:
       They stir up and confound the elements by the aid of the devil, and arouse terrible hailstorms and
       tempests. Moreover, he says they distract the minds of men, driving them to madness, insane
       hatred, and inordinate lusts. Again, he continues, by the terrible influence of their spells alone, as it
       were by a draught of poison, they can destroy life.
             And the words of S. Augustine in his book on The City of God are very much to the point, for
       he tells us who magicians and witches really are. Magicians, who are commonly called witches,
       are thus termed on account of the magnitude of their evil deeds. These are they who by the
       permission of God disturb the elements, who drive to distraction the minds of men, such as have
       lost their trust in God, and by the terrible power of their evil spells, without any actual draught or
       poison, kill human beings. As Lucan says: A mind which has not been corrupted by any noxious
       drink perishes forspoken by some evil charm. For having summoned devils to their aid they
       actually dare to heap harms upon mankind, and even to destroy their enemies by their evil spells.
       And it is certain that in operations of this kind the witch works in close conjunction with the devil.
       Secondly, punishments are of four kinds: beneficial, hurtful, wrought by witchcraft, and natural.
       Beneficial punishments are meted out by the ministry of good Angels, just as hurtful punishments
       proceed from evil spirits. Moses smote Egypt with ten plagues by the ministry of good Angels, and
       the magicians were only able to perform three of these miracles by the aid of the devil. And the
       pestilence which fell upon the people for three days because of the sin of David who numbered the
       people, and the 72,000 men who were slain in one night in the army of Sennacherib, were miracles
       wrought by the Angels of God, that is, by good Angels who feared God and knew that they were
       carrying out His commands.
             Destructive harm, however, is wrought by the medium of bad angels, at whose hands the
       children of Israel in the desert were often afflicted. And those harms which are simply evil and
       nothing more are brought about by the devil, who works through the medium of sorcerers and


file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_02a.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:02:44 PM]
Part I, Question II - P.1

       witches. There are also natural harms which in some manner depend upon the conjunction of
       heavenly bodies, such as dearth, drought, tempests, and similar effects of nature.
            It is obvious that there is a vast difference between all these causes, circumstances, and
       happenings. For Job was afflicted by the devil with a harmful disease, but this is nothing to the
       purpose. And if anybody who is too clever and over-curious asks how it was that Job was afflicted
       with this disease by the devil without the aid of some sorcerer or witch, let him know that he is
       merely beating the air and not informing himself as to the real truth. For in the time of Job there
       were no sorcerers and witches, and such abominations were not yet practised. But the providence
       of God wished that by the example of Job the power of the devil even over good men might be
       manifested, so that we might learn to be on our guard against Satan, and, moreover, by the
       example of this holy patriarch the glory of God shines abroad, since nothing happens save what is
       permitted by God.
                                                                Page 1 of 3


                                                Question II continued . . . .

                                                           Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                            HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                    All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_02a.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:02:44 PM]
Notes

           “De passionibus.” This treatise on physical science may be found in Vol. IX. of Abbé Bornet's
        edition of the “Opera omnia.”




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0016.html [2002-01-20 12:02:44 PM]
Notes

           “Galatians.” iii, i. The original Greek is                                    ,
                                                      ; Curtius doubts the etymological connexion between
                          and Latin “fascino” as from a root               . In classical times the charm was
        dissolved by spitting thrice. Cf. Theocritus, VI, 39:                                    ,
                     .




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0017.html [2002-01-20 12:02:46 PM]
Notes

           “Avicenna.” Abn Ali Al Hosian Ibn Addalah Ibn Sina, Arabian physician and philosopher,
        born at Kharmaithen, in the province of Bokhara, 980; died at Hamadan, in Northern Persia,
        1037. It should be noted that the Schoolmen were aware of the pantheistic tendencies of
        Avicenna's philosophical works, and accordingly were reluctant to trust to his exposition of
        Aristotle.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0018.html [2002-01-20 12:02:46 PM]
Notes

           “Al-Gazali.” Abu Hamid Mohammed Ibn Mohammed, the celebrated Arabian philosopher,
        born at Tous in Khorasan in 1038; died at Nissapour in 1111. He passed through complete
        scepticism to the mysticism of the Sufis. It is often said that Blessed Albertus Magnus wrote thus:
        “Non approbo dictum Avicennae et Algazel de fascinatione, quia credo quod non nocet fascinatio,
        nec nocere potest ars magica, nec facit aliquid ex his quae timentur de talibus.” But thus passage
        is more than suspicious.
        Abu Hamid al-Ghazali:
        Munkidh min al-Dalal (Confessions, or Deliverance from Error), c. 1100 CE

        The Remembrance




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0019.html [2002-01-20 12:02:46 PM]
Notes

          “Second Dialogue.” The “Dialogorum Libri IV” is one of the most famous of S. Gregory's
        works, and very many separate editions have appeared.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0020.html [2002-01-20 12:02:46 PM]
Part I, Question II - P.2


                                    THE
                            MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                        PART I.
                                              QUESTION II. CONTINUED . . . .

             With regard to the time at which this evil superstition, witchcraft, appeared, we must first
       distinguish the worshippers of the devil from those who were merely idolaters. And Vincent of
       Beauvais in his Speculum historiale, quoting many learned authorities, says that he who first
       practised the arts of magic and of astrology was Zoroaster, who is said to have been Cham the son
       of Noe. And according to S. Augustine in his book Of the City of God, Cham laughed aloud when
       he was born, and thus showed that he was a servant of the devil, and he, although he was a great
       and mighty king, was conquered by Ninus the son of Belus, who built Ninive, whose reign was the
       beginning of the kingdom of Assyria in the time of Abraham.
             Thus Ninus, owing to his insane love for his father, when his father was dead, ordered a
       statue of his father to be made, and whatever criminal took refuge there was free from any
       punishment which he might have incurred. From this time men began to worship images as though
       they were gods; but this was after the earliest years of history, for in the very first ages there was
       no idolatry, since in the earliest times men still preserved some remembrance of the creation of the
       world, as S. Thomas says, Book 2, question 95, article 4. Or it may have originated with
       Nembroth, who compelled men to worship fire; and thus in the second age of the world there
       began Idolatry, which is the first of all superstitions, as Divination is the second, and the
       Observing of Times and Seasons the third.
             The practices of witches are included in the second kind of superstition, which is to say
       Divination, since the expressly invoke the devil. And there are three kinds of this superstition: -
       Necromancy, Astrology, or rather Astromancy, the superstitious observation of stars, and
       Oneiromancy.
             I have explained all this at length that the reader may understand that these evil arts did not
       suddenly burst upon the world, but rather were developed in the process of time, and therefore it
       was not impertinent to point out that there were no witches in the days of Job. For as the years
       went by, as S. Gregory says in his Moralia, the knowledge of the Saints grew: and therefore the
       evil craft of the devil likewise increased. The prophet Isaias says: The earth is filled with the
       knowledge of the Lord (xi, 6). And so in this twilight and evening of the world, when sin is
       flourishing on every side and in every place, when charity is growing cold, the evil of witches and
       their inequities superabound.
             And since Zoroaster was wholly given up to the magic arts, it was the devil alone who
       inspired him to study and observe the stars. Very early did sorcerers and witches make compacts
       with the devil and connive with him to bring harm upon human beings. This is proved in the
       seventh chapter of Exodus, where the magicians of Pharao by the power of the devil wrought
       extraordinary wonders, imitating those plagues which Moses had brought upon Egypt by the
       power of good angels.
             Hence it follows the Catholic teaching, that in order to bring about evil a witch can and does

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_02b.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:02:47 PM]
Part I, Question II - P.2

       co-operate with the devil. And any objections to this may briefly be answered thus.
             1. In the first place, nobody denies that certain harms and damages which actually and visibly
       afflict men, animals, the fruits of the earth, and which often come about by the influence of stars,
       may yet often be brought about by demons, when God permits them do to act. For as S. Augustine
       says in the 4th book Of the City of God: Demons may make use of both fire and air if God allow
       them so to do. And a commentator remarks: God punishes by the power of evil angels.
             2. From this obviously follows the answer to any objection concerning Job, and to any
       objections which may be raised to our account of the beginnings of magic in the world.
             3. With regard to the fact that rotten sage which is thrown into running water is said to
       produce some evil effect without the help of the devil, although it may not be wholly disconnected
       with the influence of certain stars, we would point out that we do not intend to discuss the good or
       evil influence of the stars, but only witchcraft, and therefore this is beside the point.
             4. With regard to the fourth argument, it is certainly true that the devil only employs witches
       to bring about their bale and destruction. But when it is deduced that they are not to be punished,
       because they only act as instruments which are moved not by their own volition but at the will and
       pleasure of the principal and agent, there is a ready answer: For they are human instruments and
       free agents, and although they have made a compact and a contract with the devil, nevertheless
       they do enjoy absolute liberty: for, as has been learnt from their own revelations - and I speak of
       women who have been convicted and burned at the stake and who were compelled to wreak
       vengeance and evil and damage if they wished to escape punishments and blows inflicted by the
       devil - yet these women co-operate with the devil although they are bound to him by that
       profession by which at first they freely and willingly gave themselves over to his power.
             With regard to these other arguments, in which it is proved that certain old women have an
       occult knowledge which enables them to bring about extraordinary and indeed evil effects without
       the aid of the devil. It must be understood that from one particular to conclude a universal
       argument is contrary to all sound reason. And when, as it seems, throughout the whole of the
       Scriptures no such instance can be found, save where it speaks of the charms and spells old women
       practise, therefore we must not hence conclude that this is always the case. Moreover, the
       authorities on these passages leave the matter open to question, that is to say, whether such charms
       have any efficacy without the co-operation of the devil. These charms or fascinations seem capable
       of division into three kinds. First, the senses are deluded, and this may truly be done by magic, that
       is to say, by the power of the devil, if God permit it. And the senses may be enlightened by the
       power of good angels. Secondly, fascination may bring about a certain glamour and a leading
       astray, as when the apostle says: Who hath bewitched you? Galatians iii, I. In the third place, there
       may be a certain fascination cast by the eyes over another person, and this may be harmful and
       bad.
             And it is of this fascination that Avicenna and Al-Gazali have spoken; S. Thomas to thus
       mentions this fascination, Part I, question 117. For he says the mind of a man may be changed by
       the influence of another mind. And that influence which is exerted over another often proceeds
       from the eyes, for in the eyes a certain subtle influence may be concentrated. For the eyes direct
       their glance upon a certain object without taking notice of other things, and although the vision be
       perfectly clear, yet at the sight of some impurity, such, for example, a woman during her monthly
       periods, the eyes will as it were contract a certain impurity. This is what Aristotle says in his work
       On Sleep and Waking, and thus if anybody's spirit be inflamed with malice or rage, as is often the


file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_02b.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:02:47 PM]
Part I, Question II - P.2

       case with old women, then their disturbed spirit looks through their eyes, for their countenances
       are most evil and harmful, and often terrify young children of tender years, who are extremely
       impressionable. And it may be that this is often natural, permitted by God; on the other hand, it
       may be that these evil looks are often inspired by the malice of the devil, with whom old witches
       have made some secret contract.
            The next question arises with regard to the influence of the heavenly bodies, and here we find
       three very common errors, but these will be answered as we proceed to the explain other matters.
             With regard to operations of witchcraft, we find that some of these may be due to mental
       influence over others, and in some cases such mental influence might be a good one, but it is the
       motive which makes it evil.
             And there are four principal arguments which are to be objected against those who deny that
       there are witches, or magical operations, which may be performed at the conjunction of certain
       planets and stars, and that by the malice of human beings harm may be wrought through
       fashioning images, though the use of spells, and by the writing of mysterious characters. All
       theologians and philosophers agree that the heavenly bodies are guided and directed by certain
       spiritual mediums. But those spirits are superior to our minds and souls, just as the heavenly
       bodies are superior to other bodies, and therefore they can influence both the mind and body of a
       man, so that he is persuaded and directed to perform some human act. But in order yet more fully
       to attempt a solution of these matters, we may consider certain difficulties from a discussion of
       which we shall yet more clearly arrive at the truth. First, spiritual substance cannot change bodies
       to some other natural form unless it be through the mediumship of some agent. Therefore, however
       strong a mental influence may be, it cannot effect any change in a man's mind or disposition.
       Moreover, several universities, especially that of Paris, have condemned the following article: -
       That an enchanter is able to cast a camel into a deep ditch merely by directing his gaze upon it.
       And so this article is condemned, that a corporeal body should obey some spiritual substance if
       this be understood simply, that is to say, if the obedience entails some actual change or
       transformation. For in regard to this it is God alone Who is absolutely obeyed. Bearing these
       points in mind we may soon see how that fascination, or influence of the eyes of which we have
       spoken, is possible. For it is not possible that a man through the natural powers of his mind should
       direct such power from his eyes that, without the agency of his own body or of some other
       medium, he should be able to do harm to the body of another man. Nor is it possible that a man
       through the natural powers of his mind should at his will bring about some change, and by
       directing this power through the mediumship of his eyes entirely transform the body of a man,
       upon whom he fixes his gaze, just as his will and pleasure may be.
             And therefore in neither of these ways can one man influence another and fascinate another,
       for no man by the natural powers of his mind alone possesses such an extraordinary influence.
       Therefore, to wish to prove that evil effects can be produced by some natural power is to say that
       this natural power is the power of the devil, which is very far indeed from the truth.
             Nevertheless, we may more clearly set forth how it is possible for a careful gaze to do harm.
       It may so happen that if a man or a woman gaze steadfastly at some child, the child, owing to its
       power of sight and power of imagination, may receive some very sensible and direct impression.
       And an impression of this kind is often accompanied by a bodily change, and since the eyes are
       one of the tenderest organs of the body, therefore they are very liable to such impressions.
       Therefore it may well happen that the eyes receive some bad impression and change for the worse,
       since very often the thoughts of the mind or the motions of the body are particularly impressed

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_02b.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:02:47 PM]
Part I, Question II - P.2

       upon and shown by the eyes. And so it may happen that some angry and evil gaze, if it has been
       steadfastly fixed and directed upon a child, may so impress itself upon that child's memory and
       imagination that it may reflect itself in the gaze of the child, and actual results will follow, as, for
       example, he may lose his appetite and be unable to take food, he may sicken and fall ill. And
       sometimes we see that the sight of a man who is suffering from his eyes may cause the eyes of
       those who gaze upon him to dazzle and feel weak, although to a large extent this is nothing else
       but the effect of pure imagination. Several other examples of the same sort might be discussed
       here, but for the sake of conciseness we will not discuss them in any further detail.
            All this is borne out of the commentators upon the Psalm, Qui timent te uidebunt me. There is
       a great power in the eyes, and this appears even in natural things. For if a wolf see a man first, the
       man is struck dumb. Moreover, if a basilisk see a man first its look is fatal; but if he see it first he
       may be able to kill it; and the reason why the basilisk is able to kill a man by its gaze is because
       when it sees him, owing to its anger a certain terrible poison is set in motion throughout its body,
       and this it can dart from its eyes, thus injecting the atmosphere with deadly venom. And thus the
       man breathes in the air which it has infected and is stupefied and dies. But when the beast is first
       seen by the man, in a case when the man wishes to kill the basilisk, he furnishes himself with
       mirrors, and the beast seeing itself in the mirrors darts out poison towards it reflection, but the
       poison recoils and the animal dies. It does not seem plain, however, why the man who thus kills
       the basilisk should not die too, and we can only conclude that this is on account of some reason not
       clearly understood.
            So far we have set down our opinions absolutely without prejudice and refraining from any
       hasty or rash judgement, not deviating from the teachings and writings of the Saints. We conclude,
       therefore, that the Catholic truth is this, that to bring about these evils which form the subject of
       discussion, witches and the devil always work together, and that in so far as these matters are
       concerned one can do nothing without the aid and assistance of the other.
                                                                Page 2 of 3


                                                Question II continued . . . .

                                                           Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                            HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                    All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_02b.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:02:47 PM]
Notes

           “Vincent.” Little is known of the personal history of this celebrated encyclopaedist. The years
        of his birth and death are uncertain, but the dates most frequently assigned are 1190 and 1264
        respectively. It is thought that he joined the Dominicans in Paris shortly after 1218, and that he
        passed practically his whole life in his monastery in Beauvais, where he occupied himself
        incessantly upon his enormous work, the general title of which is “Speculum Maius,” containing
        80 books, divided into 9885 chapters. The third part, “Speculum Historiale,” in 31 books and
        3793 chapters, bring the History of the World down to A.D. 1250.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0022.html [2002-01-20 12:02:47 PM]
Notes

           “Zoroaster.” Pliny, “Historia Naturalis,” XXX, ii, says of magic: “Sine dubio illic orta in
        Perside a Zoroastre, ut inter auctores conuenit. Sed unus hic fuerit, an postea et alius, non satis
        constat.” Apuleius, “De Magia,” XXVI, mentions Zoroaster and Oromazus as the inventors of
        sorcery. “Audustine magiam . . . artem esse dis immortalibus acceptam . . . a Zoroastro et
        Oromazo auctoribus suis nobilem, caelitum antistitam?”




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0023.html [2002-01-20 12:02:48 PM]
Notes

           “Cham.” “A.V.” Ham. Lenglet du Fresnoy in his “History of the Hemetic Philosophy” repeats
        an old tradition: “Most alchemists pretended that Cham, or Chem, the son of Noe, was an adept in
        the art, and thought it highly probable that the words ‘Chemistry’ and ‘Alchemy’ are both derived
        from his name.” Lactantius, “De Origine Erroris,” II, says of the descendants of Cham: “Omnium
        primi qui Aegyptum occupauerunt; caelestia suspicere, atque adorare coeperunt.”
            “Réalité de la Magie et des Apparitions,” Paris, 1819 (pp. xii-xiii), has: “Le monde, purgé par
        le déluge, fut repeuplé par les trois fils de Noé. Sem et Japhet imitèrent la vertu de leur père, et
        furent justes comme lui. Cham, au contraire, donna entrée au démon dans son coeur, remit au jour
        l’art exécrable de la magie, en composa les règles, et en instruisit son fils Misraim.
           “Cent trente ans après le déluge, Sem habitait la Perse. Ses enfans pratiguaient la religion
        naturelle, que Dieu mit dans le coeur du premier homme; et leurs vieillards se nommaient mages,
        qui veit dire “sages” en notre langue. Dans la suite, les descendans de Cham se partagèrent, et
        quielques-uns passèrent en Perse; Cham, qui vivait encore, était à leur tête. Il opéra tant de
        Zoroastre, c’est-à-dire, ‘astre vivant’; et transportèrent à ceux de sa secte le nom honorable de
        “mages,” que les adorateurs du vrai Dieu abandonnèrent, dès qui’ils le virent ainsi profané: et
        c’est de là que nous est venu le nom de ‘magie,’ pour signifier le culte du démon.
            “Cham, ou Zoroastre, fut encore l’inventeur de l’astrologie judiciaire; il regarda les astres
        comme autant de dininités, et persuada aux hommes que tout leur destin dépendait de leurs bonnes
        ou mauvaises influences. Ainsi l’on commença à leur rendre un culte religieux, qui fut l’origine de
        l’idolâtrie. La Chaldée fut le premier théâtre de ces égaremens; et alors, ‘Chaldéen, astrologue et
        magicien’ étaient trius mots synonymes.”




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0024.html [2002-01-20 12:02:48 PM]
Notes

           “Nembroth.” S. Augustine, “De Ciuitate Dei,” XVI, 3, quotes: “Chus autem genuit Nebrothl
        hic coepit esse gigans super terram. Hic erat gigans uenator contra Dominum Deum.” Nebroth is
        the English Nimrod, who was considered a past master of magic, and even by later ages a demon.
        So we have: “Nembroth. Un des esprits que les magiciens consultent. Le mardi lui est consacré, et
        on l’évoque ce jour-là: il faut, pour le renvoyer, lui jeter une pierre; ce qui est facile.” Collin de
        Plancy (“Dictionnaire Infernal,” sixième édition, 1863).




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0025.html [2002-01-20 12:02:48 PM]
Notes

           “Cast by the eyes.” In Ireland it was supposed that certain witches could cast a spell at a
        glance, and they were commonly called “eye-biting witches.”




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0026.html [2002-01-20 12:02:48 PM]
Notes

           “On Sleep.” This is one of the smaller treatises connected with Aristotle's great work “On the
        Soul”,               .




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0027.html [2002-01-20 12:02:48 PM]
Notes

           “Qui timent.” Psalm li, 8: Uidebunt iusti et timebunt.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0028.html [2002-01-20 12:02:49 PM]
Part I, Question II - P.3


                                    THE
                            MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                         PART I.
                                                 QUESTION II. - CONTINUED

              We have already treated of this fascination. And now with reference to the second point,
       namely, that blood will flow from a corpse in the presence of a murderer. According to the
       Speculum naturale of Vincent of Beauvis, c. 13, the wound is, as it were, influenced by the mind
       of the murderer, and that wound receives a certain atmosphere which has been impressed by and is
       permeated with his violence and hatred, and when the murderer draws near, the blood wells up and
       gushes forth from the corpse. For it would seem that this atmosphere, which was cause and as it
       were entered the wound owing to the murderer, at his presence is disturbed and greatly moved, and
       it is owing to this movement that the blood streams out of the dead body. There are some who
       declared that it is due to some other causes, and they say that this gushing forth of blood is the
       voice of the blood crying from the earth against the murderer who is present, and that this is on
       account of the curse pronounced against the murderer Cain. And with regard to that horror which a
       person feels when he is passing near the corpse of a man who has been murdered, although he may
       not be in any way cognizant of the vicinity of a dead body, this horror is psychic, it infects the
       atmosphere and conveys a thrill of fear to the mind. But all these explanations, be it noted, do not
       in any way affect the truth of the evil wrought by witches, since they are all perfectly natural and
       arise from natural causes.
              In the third place, as we have already said above, the operations and rites of witches are
       placed in that second category of superstition which is called Divination; and of this divination
       there are three kinds, but the argument does not hold good with reference to the third kind, which
       belongs to a different species, for witchcraft is not merely any divination, but it is that divination,
       the operations of which are performed by express and explicit invocations of the devil; and this
       may be done in very many ways, as by Necromancy, Geomancy, Hydromancy, etc.
              Wherefore this divination, which is used when they are working their spells, must be judged
       to be the height of criminal wickedness, although some have attempted to regard it from another
       point of view. And they argue thus, that as we do not know the hidden powers of nature, it may be
       that the witches are merely employing or seeking to employ these hidden powers: assuredly if they
       are employing the natural power of natural things to bring about a natural effect, this must be
       perfectly lawful. as indeed is obvious enough. Or even let us conceive that if the superstitiously
       employ natural things, as, for example, by writing down certain characters or unknown names of
       some kind, and that then they use these runes for restoring a person to health, or for inducing
       friendship, or with some useful end, and not at all for doing any damage or harm, in such cases, it
       may be granted, I say, that there is no express invocation of demons; nevertheless it cannot be that
       these spells are employed without a tacit invocation, wherefore all such charms must be judge to
       be wholly unlawful.
              And because these and many other charms like to them may be placed in the third category of
       superstition, that is to say, idle and vain observing of time and seasons, this is by no means a


file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_02c.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:02:49 PM]
Part I, Question II - P.3

       relevant argument as to the heresy of witches. But of this category, the observing of times and
       seasons, there are four distinct species: A man may use such observations to acquire certain
       knowledge: or he may in this way seek to inform himself concerning lucky or unlucky days and
       things: or he may use sacred words and prayers as a charm with no reference to their meaning: or
       he may intend and desire to bring about some beneficial change in some body. All this S. Thomas
       has amply treated in that question where he asks, Whether such observing be lawful, especially if
       it be to bring about a beneficial change in a body, that is to say, the restoration of persons to health.
       But when witches observe times and seasons, their practices must be held to belong to the second
       kind of superstition, and therefore, in so far as they are concerned, questions concerning this third
       class are wholly impertinent.
             We now proceed to a fourth proposition, inasmuch as from observations of the kind we have
       discussed certain charts and images are wont to be made, but these are of two separate sorts, which
       differ entirely one from the other; and these are Astronomical and Necromantic. Now in
       Necromancy there is always an express and particular invocation of demons, for this craft implies
       that there has been an express compact and contract with them. Let us therefore only consider
       Astrology. In Astrology there is no compact, and therefore there is no invocation, unless by chance
       there be some kind of tacit invocation, since the figures of demons and their names sometimes
       appear in Astrological charts. And again, Necromantic signs are written under the influence of
       certain stars in order to counteract the influence and oppositions of other heavenly bodies, and
       these are inscribed, for signs and characters of this kind are often engraved upon rings, gems, or
       some other precious metal, but magic signs are engraved without any reference to the influence of
       the stars, and often upon any substance, nay, even upon vile and sordid substances, which when
       buried in certain places bring about damage and harm and disease. But we are discussing charts
       which are made with reference to the stars. And these Necromantic charts and images have no
       reference to any heavenly body. Therefore a consideration of them does not enter into the present
       discussion.
             Moreover, many of these images which have been made with superstitious rites have no
       efficacy at all, that is to say, in so far as the fashioning of them is concerned, although it may be
       that the material of which they are made does possess a certain power, although this is not due to
       the fact that they were made under the influence of certain stars. Yet many hold that it is in any
       case unlawful to make use even of images like these. But the images made by witches have no
       natural power at all, nor has the material of which they are formed any power; but they fashion
       such images by command of the devil, that by so doing they may, as it were, mock the work of the
       Creator, and that they may provoke Him to anger so that in punishment of their misdeeds He may
       suffer plagues to fall upon the earth. And in order to increase their guilt they delight especially to
       fashion many such images at the more solemn seasons of the year.
             With regard to the fifth point, S. Gregory is there speaking of the power of grace and not of
       the power of nature. And since, as S. John says, we are born of God, what wonder then that the
       sons of God enjoy extraordinary powers.
             With regard to the last point we will say this, that a mere likeness is irrelevant, because the
       influence of one's own mind on one's own body is different from its influence upon another body
       as though the body were the material form of the mind, and the emotions are an act of the body,
       but separate, therefore the emotion can be changed by the influence of the mind whensoever there
       is some bodily change, heat or cold, or any alteration, even to death itself. But to change the actual
       body, no act of the mind is sufficient by itself, unless there can be some physical result which
       alters the body. Whence witches, by the exercise of no natural power, but only by the help of the

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_02c.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:02:49 PM]
Part I, Question II - P.3

       devil, are able to bring about harmful effects. And the devils themselves can only do this by the
       use of material objects as their instruments, such as bones, hair, wood, iron, and all sorts of objects
       of this kind, concerning which operation we shall treat more fully a little later.
             Now with regard to the tenor of the Bull of our Most Holy Father the Pope, we will discuss
       the origin of witches, and how it is that of recent years their works have so multiplied among us.
       And it must be borne in mind that for this to take place, three things concur, the devil, the witch,
       and the permission of God who suffers such things to be. For S. Augustine says, that the
       abomination of witchcraft arose from this foul connexion of mankind with the devil. Therefore it is
       plain that the origin and the increase of this heresy arises from this foul connexion, a fact which
       many authors approve.
             We must especially observe that this heresy, witchcraft, not only differs from all other heresy
       in this, that not merely by a tacit compact, but by a compact which is exactly defined and
       expressed it blasphemes the Creator and endeavours to the utmost to profane Him and to harm His
       creatures, for all other simple heresies have made no open compact with the devil, no compact,
       that is, either tacit or exactly expressed, although their errors and misbelief are directly to be
       attributed to the Father of errors and lies. Moreover, witchcraft differs from all other harmful and
       mysterious arts in this point, that of all superstition it is essentially the vilest, the most evil and the
       worst, wherefore it derives its name from doing evil, and from blaspheming the true faith.
       (Melaficae dictae a Melficiendo, seu a male de fide sentiendo.)
             Let us especially note too that in the practice of this abominable evil, four points in particular
       are required. First, most profanely to renounce the Catholic Faith, or at any rate to deny certain
       dogmas of the faith; secondly, to devote themselves body and soul to all evil; thirdly, to offer up
       unbaptized children to Satan; fourthly, to indulge in every kind of carnal lust with Incubi and
       Succubi and all manner of filthy delights.
             Would to God that we might suppose all this to be untrue and merely imaginary, if only our
       Holy Mother the Church were free from the leprosy of such abomination. Alas, the judgement of
       the Apostolic See, who is alone the Mistress and the Teacher of all truth, that judgement, I say,
       which has been expressed in the Bull of our Holy Father the Pope, assures us and makes us aware
       that amongst us, and we dare not refrain from inquiring into them lest we imperil our own
       salvation. And therefore we must discuss at length the origin and the increase of these
       abominations; it has been a work of much labour indeed, and we trust that every detail will most
       exactly and carefully be weighed by those who read this book, for herein will be found nothing
       contrary to sound reason, nothing which differs from the words of Scripture and the tradition of the
       Fathers.
             Now there are two circumstances which are certainly very common at the present day, that is
       to say, the connexion of witches with familiars, Incubi and Succubi, and the horrible sacrifices of
       small children. Therefore we shall particularly deal with these matters, so that in the first place we
       shall discuss these demons themselves, secondly, the witches and their works, and thirdly, we will
       inquire wherefore such things are suffered to be. Now these demons work owing to their influence
       upon man's mind and upon his free will, and they choose to copulate under the influence of certain
       stars rather than under the influence of others, for it would seem that at certain times their semen
       can more easily generate and beget children. Accordingly, we must inquire why the demons
       should act at the conjunction of certain stars, and what times these are.
             There are three chief points to discuss. First, whether the abominable heresies can be
       multiplied throughout the world by those who give themselves to Incubi and Succubi. Secondly,

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_02c.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:02:49 PM]
Part I, Question II - P.3

       whether their actions have not a certain extraordinary power when performed under the influence
       of certain stars. Thirdly, whether this abominable heresy is not widely spread by those who
       profanely sacrifice children to Satan. Moreover, when we have discussed the second point, before
       we proceed to the third, we must consider the influence of the stars, and what power they have in
       acts of witchcraft.
            With regard to the first question there are three difficulties which need elucidation.
            The first is a general consideration of these demons, which are called Incubi.
            The second question is more particular, for we must inquire, How can these Incubi perform
       the human act of copulation?
            The third question is also a special one, How do witches bind themselves to and copulate with
       these devils?
                                                                Page 3 of 3


                                                             Question III

                                                           Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                            HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                    All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_02c.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:02:49 PM]
Part I, Question III


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                              PART I.
                                                            QUESTION III.

                               Whether children can be generated by Incubi and Succubi.

             At first it may truly seem that it is not in accordance with the Catholic Faith to maintain that
       children can be begotten by devils, that is to say, by Incubi and Succubi: for God Himself, before
       sin came into the world, instituted human procreation, since He created woman from the rib of
       man to be a helpmeet unto man: And to them He said: Increase, and multiply, Genesis ii, 24.
       Likewise after sin had come into the world, it was said to Noe: Increase, and multiply, Genesis ix,
       1. In the time of the new law also, Christ confirmed this union: Have ye not read, that he who
       made man from the beginning, Made them male and female? S. Matthew xix, 4. Therefore, men
       cannot be begotten in any other way than this.
            But it may be argued that devils take their part in this generation not as the essential cause,
       but as a secondary and artificial cause, since they busy themselves by interfering with the process
       of normal copulation and conception, by obtaining human semen, and themselves transferring it.
            Objection. The devil can perform this act in every state of life, that is to say, in the
       matrimonial state, or not in the matrimonial state. Now he cannot perform it in the first state,
       because then the act of the devil would be more powerful than the act of God, Who instituted and
       confirmed this holy estate, since it is a state of continence and wedlock. Nor can he effect this in
       any other estate: since we never read in Scripture that children can be begotten in one state and not
       in another.
             Moreover, to beget a child is the act of a living body, but devils cannot bestow life upon the
       bodies which they assume; because life formally only proceeds from the soul, and the act of
       generation is the act of the physical organs which have bodily life. Therefore bodies which are
       assumed in this way cannot either beget or bear.
             Yet it may be said that these devils assume a body not in order that they may bestow life upon
       it, but that they may by the means of this body preserve human semen, and pass the semen on to
       another body.
             Objection. As in the action of angels, whether they be good or bad, there is nothing
       superfluous and useless, nor is there anything superfluous and useless in nature. But the devil by
       his natural power, which is far greater than any human bodily power, can perform any spiritual
       action, and perform it again and again although man may not be able to discern it. Therefore he is
       able to perform this action, although man may not be able to discern when the devil is concerned
       therewith. For all bodily and material things are on a lower scale than pure and spiritual
       intelligences. But the angels, whether they be good or whether they be evil, are pure and spiritual
       intelligences. Therefore they can control what is below them. Therefore the devil can collect and
       make use as he will of human semen which belongs to the body.

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_03a.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:02:50 PM]
Part I, Question III

             However, to collect human semen from one person and to transfer it to another implies
       certain local actions. But devils cannot locally move bodies from place to place. And this is the
       argument they put forward. The soul is purely a spiritual essence, so is the devil: but the soul
       cannot move a body from place to place except it be that body in which it lives and to which it
       gives life: whence if any member of the body perishes it becomes dead and immovable. Therefore
       devils cannot move a body from place to place, except it be a body to which they give life. It has
       been shown, however, and is acknowledged that devils do not bestow life on anybody, therefore
       they cannot move human semen locally, that is, from place to place, from body to body.
             Moreover, every action is performed by contact, and especially the act of generation. But it
       does not seem possible that there can be any contact between the demon and human bodies, since
       he has not actual point of contact with them. Therefore he cannot inject semen into a human body,
       and therefore since this needs a certain bodily action, it would seem that the devil cannot
       accomplish it.
             Besides, devils have no power to move those bodies which in a natural order are more closely
       related to them, for example the heavenly bodies, therefore they have no power to move those
       bodies which are more distant and distinct from them. The major is proved, since the power that
       moves and the movement are one and the same thing according to Aristotle in his Physics. It
       follows, therefore, that devils who move heavenly bodies must be in heaven, which is wholly
       untrue, both in our opinion, and in the opinion of the Platonists.
             Moreover, S. Augustine, On the Trinity, III, says that devils do indeed collect human semen,
       by means of which they are able to produce bodily effects; but this cannot be done without some
       local movement, therefore demons can transfer semen which they have collected and inject it into
       the bodies of others. But, as Walafrid Strabo says in his commentary upon Exodus vii, II: And
       Pharao called the wise men and the magicians: Devils go about the earth collecting every sort of
       seed, and can by working upon them broadcast various species. See also the gloss on those words
       (Pharao called). And again in Genesis vi the gloss makes two comments on the words: And the
       sons of God saw the daughters of men. First, that by the sons of God are meant the sons of Seth,
       and by the daughters of men, the daughters of Cain. Second, that Giants were created not by some
       incredibly act of men, but by certain devils, which are shameless towards women. For the Bible
       says, Giants were upon the earth. Moreover, even after the Flood the bodies not only of men, but
       also of women, were pre-eminently and incredibly beautiful.
             Answer. For the sake of brevity much concerning the power of the devil and his works in the
       matter of the effects of witchcraft is left out; for the pious reader either accepts it as proved, or he
       may, if he wish to inquire, find every point clearly elucidated in the second Book of Sentences, 5.
       For hw will see that the devils perform all their works consciously and voluntarily; for the nature
       that was given them has not been changed. See Dionysius in his fourth chapter on the subject; their
       nature remained intact and very splendid, although they cannot use it for any good purpose.
             And as to their intelligence, he will find that they excel in three points of understanding, in
       their age-long experience, and in the revelation of the higher spirits. He will find also how, through
       the influence of the stars, they learn the dominating characteristics of men, and so discover that
       some are more disposed to work witchcraft that others, and that they molest these chiefly for the
       purpose of such works.
             And as to their will, the reader will find that it cleaves unchangeably to evil, and that they
       continuously sin in pride, envy, and gross covetousness; and that God, for his own glory, permits
       them to work against His will. He will also understand how with these two qualities of intellect

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_03a.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:02:50 PM]
Part I, Question III

       and will devils do marvels, so that there is no power in earth which can be compared to them: Job
       xli. There is no power on the earth which can be compared with him, who was created that he
       should fear no one. But here the gloss says, Although he fears no one he is yet subject to the merits
       of the Saints.
             He will find also how the devil knows the thoughts of our hearts; how he can substantially
       and disastrously metamorphose bodies with the help of an agent; how he can move bodies locally,
       and alter the outward and inner feelings to every conceivable extent; and how he can change the
       intellect and will of a man, however indirectly.
             For although all this is pertinent to our present inquiry, we wish only to draw some
       conclusion therefrom as to that nature of devils, and so proceed to the discussion of our question.
             Now the Theologians have ascribed to them certain qualities, as that they are unclean spirits,
       yet not by very nature unclean. For according to Dionysius there is in them a natural madness, a
       rabid concupiscence, a wanton fancy, as is seen from their spiritual sins of pride, envy, and wrath.
       For this reason they are the enemies of the human race: rational in mind, but reasoning without
       words; subtle in wickedness, eager to hurt; ever fertile in fresh deceptions, they change the
       perceptions and befoul the emotions of men, they confound the watchful, and in dreams disturb the
       sleeping; they bring diseases, stir up tempests, disguise themselves as angels of light, bear Hell
       always about them; from witches they usurp to themselves the worship of God, and by this means
       magic spells are made; they seek to get a mastery over the good, and molest them to the most of
       their power; to the elect they are given as a temptation, and always they lie in wait for the
       destruction of men.
             And although they have a thousand ways of doing harm, and have tried ever since their
       downfall to bring about schisms in the Church, to disable charity, to infect with the gall of envy
       the sweetness of the acts of the Saints, and in every way to subvert and perturb the human race; yet
       their power remains confined to the privy parts and the navel. See Job xli. For through the
       wantonness of the flesh they have much power over men; and in men the source of wantonness lies
       in the privy parts, since it is from them that the semen falls, just as in women it falls from the
       navel.
             These things, then, being granted for a proper understanding of the question of Incubi and
       Succubi, it must be said that it is just as Catholic a view to hold that men may at times be begotten
       by means of Incubi and Succubi, as it is contrary to the words of the Saints and even to the
       tradition of Holy Scripture to maintain the opposite opinion. And this is proved as follows. S.
       Augustine in one place raises this question, not indeed as regards witches, but with reference to the
       very works of devils, and to the fables of the poets, and leave the matter in some doubt; though
       later on he is definite in the matter of Holy Scripture. For in his De Ciuitate Dei, Book 3, chapter
       2, he says: We leave open the question whether it was possible for Venus to give birth to Aeneas
       through coition with Anchises. For a similar question arises in the Scriptures, where it is asked
       whether evil angels lay with the daughters of men, and thereby the earth was then filled with
       giants, that is to say, preternaturally big and strong men. But he settles the question in Book 5,
       chapter 23, in these words: It is a very general belief, the truth of which is vouched for by many
       from their own experience, or at least from heresay as having been experienced by men of
       undoubted trustworthiness, that Satyrs and Fauns (which are commonly called Incubi) have
       appeared to wanton women and have sought and obtained coition with them. And that certain
       devils (which the Gauls call Dusii) assiduously attempt and achieve this filthiness is vouched for
       by so many credible witness that it would seem impudent to deny it.
             Later in the same book he settles the second contention, namely, that the passage in Genesis

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_03a.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:02:50 PM]
Part I, Question III

       about the sons of God (that is Seth) and the daughters of men (that is Cain) does not speak only of
       Incubi, since the existence of such is not credible. In this connexion there is the gloss which we
       have touched upon before. He says that it is not outside belief that the Giants of whom the
       Scripture speaks were begotten not by men, but by Angels or certain devils who lust after women.
       To the same effect is the gloss in Esaias xiii, where the prophet foretells the desolation of Babylon,
       and the monsters that should inhabit it. He says: Owls shall dwell there, and Satyrs shall dance
       there. By Satyrs here devils are meant; as the gloss says, Satyrs are wild shaggy creatures of the
       woods, which are a certain kind of devils called Incubi. And again in Esaias xxxiv, where he
       prophesies the desolation of the land of the Idumeans because they persecuted the Jews, he says:
       And it shall be an habitation of dragons, and a court for owls. The wild beasts also of the desert
       shall meet . . . The interlinear gloss interprets this as monsters and devils. And in the same place
       Blessed Gregory explains these to be woodland gods under another name, not those which the
       Greeks called Pans, and the Latins Incubi.
            Similarly Blessed Isidore, in the last chapter of his 8th book, says: Satyrs are they who are
       called Pans in Greek and Incubi in Latin. And they are called Incubi from their practice of
       overlaying, that is debauching. For they often lust lecherously after women, and copulate with
       them; and the Gauls name them Dusii, because they are diligent in this beastliness. But the devil
       which the common people call an Incubus, the Romans called a fig Faun; to which Horace said,
       “O Faunus, love of fleeing nymphs, go gently over my lands and smiling fields.”


                                                                Page 1 of 2


                                               Question III Continued . . . .

                                                           Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                       HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                               All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_03a.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:02:50 PM]
Notes

          “Incubi.” For a very full discussion of the whole subject see Sinistrari's “Demoniality” with
        my Commentary and glosses, Fortune Press, 1927.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0029.html [2002-01-20 12:02:50 PM]
Notes

               “Dionysius.” A series of famous writings attributed to S. Dionysius the Areopagite (“Acts”
        xvii, 34), who was also popularly identified with the Martyr of Gaul, the first Bishop of Paris. The
        writings themselves form a collection of four treatises and ten letters. These will all be found in
        Migne, “Patres Graeci,” III. The treatises are generally referred to under their Latin names, “De
        Diuinis nominibus”; “Caelestis heirarchia”; “Ecclesiastica hierarchia”; “Theologia mystica.”
        The main source from which the Middle Ages obtained a knowledged of Dionysius and his
        doctrine was undoubtedly the Latin translation by Scotus Eriugena, made bout 858. There are
        ample commentaries by many great writers such as Hugh of Saint-Victor, Blessed Alburtus
        Magnus, S. Thomas, and Denys the Carthusian. The works of Dionysius the Aeropagite and the
        identification of this writer with S. Denys were accepts by Saints and Schoolmen, and perhaps we
        should do well to follow them without curious questions and impertinent discussion.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0030.html [2002-01-20 12:02:50 PM]
Notes

                “Esaias.” See my gloss upon this passage, “Demoniality,” Introduction, xxvi-xxviii.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0031.html [2002-01-20 12:02:51 PM]
Notes

              “Overlaying.” Nider, “Formicarius,” ix, writes: “Incubi dicuntur ab incumbendo, hoc est
        struprando.”




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0032.html [2002-01-20 12:02:51 PM]
Notes

             “Dusii.” “De Ciuitate Dei,” XV, 23, where S. Augustine has: “Et quosdam daemones, quos
        Dusios Galli nuncupant, adsidue hanc immunditiam et efficere, plures talesque adseuerant, ut hoc
        negare impudentiae uideatur.”




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0033.html [2002-01-20 12:02:51 PM]
Notes

               “A Fig Faun.” “Jeremias” l, 39, the desolation of Babylon, has: Propterea habitabunt
        dracones cum faunis ficariis: et habitabunt in ea struthiones: et non inhabitabutur ultra usque in
        sempiternum, nec exstruetur uque ad generationem, et generationem. Which Douay translates:
        “Therefore shall dragons dwell there with the fig fauns: and ostriches shall dwell therein, and it
        shall be no more inherited for ever, neither shall it be built up from generation to generation.” The
        English gloss says: “‘Fig fauns.’ Monsters of the desert, or demons in monstrous shapes: such as
        the ancients called ‘fauns’ and ‘satyrs’: and as they imagined them to live upon wild figs, they
        called them ‘fauni ficarii’ or ‘fig fauns.’” Mirabeau, “Erotika Biblion” (pseudo-Rome), 1783,
        under “Béhémah” writes: “Les satyrs, les faunes, les égypans, toutes ces fables en sont une
        tradition très remarquable. Satan en arabe signifie bouc; et le bouc expiatoire ne fut ordonné par
        Moyse que pour détourner les Israélites du goût qu’ils avoient pour cet animal lascif. (Maimonide
        dans le More Nevochin, p. III, c. xlvi, s’étend sur les cultes des boucs). Comme il est dit dans
        l’Exode qu’on ne pouvoit voir la face des dieux, les Israélites étoient persuadés que les démons si
        faisoient voir sous cette forme. . . . On a enquite confondu les incubes et les succubes avec les
        véritables produits. Jérémie parle de faunes suffoquans. (Jérém., l, 39. Faunis sicariis et non pas
        ficariis. Car des faunes qui avoient des figues ne voudroit n’en dire. Cependant Saci la traduit
        ainsi; car les Jansénistes affectent la plus grande pureté des moeurs, mais Berruyer soutient le
        ‘Sicarii’ et rend ses faunes très actifs.) Héraclite a décrit des satyres qui vivoient dans les bois, et
        jouissoient en commun des femmes dont ils s’emparoient.” But the Vulgate has “Fauni ficarii,”
        which settles the point. That the reading was very disputed is clear from Nider, “Formicarius,”
        who has: “Quem autem uulgo Incubonem uocant, hunc Romani uicarium dicunt. Ad quem
        Horatius dicit: Faune Nympharum fugientium amator meos per fines et aprica rura lenis incedas.
        Insuper illud Apostoli I Cor. xi. Mulier debet uelamen habere super caput suum propter Angelos:
        Multi Catholici exponunt quod sequitur, propter angelos, id est Incubos.” The quotation from
        Horace is “Carminum,” III, 18.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0034.html [2002-01-20 12:02:51 PM]
Part I, Question III, P.2


                                    THE
                            MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                        PART I.
                                              QUESTION III CONTINUED . . . .

              As to that of S. Paul in I. Corinthians xi, A woman ought to have a covering on her head,
       because of the angels, many Catholics believe that “because of the angels” refers to Incubi. Of the
       same opinion is the Venerable Bede in his History of the English; also William of Paris in his book
       De Uniuerso, the last part of the 6th treatise. Moreover, S. Thomas speaks of this (I. 25 and II. 8,
       and elsewhere; also on Esaias xii and xiv). Therefore he says that it is rash to deny such things.
       For that which appears true to many cannot be altogether false, according to Aristotle (at the end of
       the De somno et uigilia, and in the 2nd Ethics). I say nothing of the many authentic histories, both
       Catholic and heathen, which openly affirm the existence of Incubi.
              But the reason the devils turn themselves into Incubi or Succubi is not for the cause of
       pleasure, since a spirit has not flesh and blood; but chiefly it is with this intention, that through the
       vice of luxury they may work a twofold harm against men, that is, in body and in soul, that so men
       may be more given to all vices. And there is no doubt that they know under which stars the semen
       is most vigorous, and that men so conceived will be always perverted by witchcraft.
              When Almighty God had enumerated many vice of luxury rife among the unbelievers and
       heretics, from which He wished His people to be clean, He says in Leviticus xviii: Defile not ye
       yourselves in any of these things: for in all these the nations are defiled which I cast out before
       you: and the land is defiled: therefore I do visit the iniquity thereof upon it. The gloss explains the
       word “nations” as meaning devils who, on account of their multitude, are call the nations of the
       world, and rejoice in all sin, especially in fornication and idolatry, because by these are defiled the
       body and the soul, and the whole man, which is called “the land.” For every sin that a man
       commits is outside his body, but the man who commits fornication sins in his body. If anyone
       wishes to study further the histories concerning Incubi and Succubi, let him read (as has been said)
       Bede in his History of the English, and William, and finally Thomas of Brabant in his book About
       Bees.
              To return to the matter in hand. And first for the natural act of propagation instituted by God,
       that is, between male and female; that as though by the permission of God the Sacrament of
       Matrimony can be made void by the work of the devil through witchcraft, as has been shown
       above. And the same is much more strongly true of any other venereal act between man and
       woman.
              But if it is asked why the devil is allowed to case spells upon the venereal act, rather than
       upon any other human act, it is answered that many reasons are assigned by the Doctors, which
       will be discussed later in the part concerning the divine permission. For the present that reason that
       has been mentioned before must suffice, namely, that the power of the devil lies in the privy parts
       of men. For of all struggles those are the harder where the fight is continuous and victory rare. And
       it is unsound to argue that in that case the work of the devil is stronger than the work of God, since
       the matrimonial act instituted by God can be made void: for the devil does not make it void by


file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_03b.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:02:52 PM]
Part I, Question III, P.2

       violence, since he has no power at all in the matter except as he is permitted by God. Therefore it
       would be better to argue from this that he is powerless.
             Secondly, it is true that to procreate a man is the act of a living body. But when it is said that
       devils cannot give life, because that flows formally from the soul, it is true; but materially life
       springs from the semen, and an Incubus devil can, with God's permission, accomplish this by
       coition. And the semen does not so much spring from him, as it is another man's semen received
       by him for this purpose (see S. Thomas, I. 51, art. 3). For the devil is Succubus to a man, and
       becomes Incubus to a woman. In just the same way they absorb the seeds of other things for the
       generating of various thing, as S. Augustine says, de Trinitate 3.
             Now it may be asked, of whom is a child born the son? It is clear that he is not the son of the
       devil, but of the man whose semen was received. But when it is urged that, just as in the works of
       Nature, so there is no superfluity in the works of angels, that is granted; but when it is inferred that
       the devil can receive and inject semen invisibly, this also is true; but he prefers to perform this
       visibly as a Succubus and an Incubus, that by such filthiness he may infect body and soul of all
       humanity, that is, of both woman and man, there being, as it were, actual bodily contact.
             Moreover, devils can do invisibly more things which they are not permitted to do visibly,
       even if the so wished; but they are allowed to do them invisibly, either as a trial for the good, or as
       a punishment for the wicked. Finally, it may happen that another devil may take the place of the
       Succubus, receive the semen from him, and become and Incubus in the place of the other devil;
       and this for a threefold reason. Perhaps because one devil, allotted to a woman, should receive
       semen from another devil, allotted to a man, that in this way each of them should be commissioned
       by the prince of devils to work some witchcraft; since, to each one is allotted his own angel, even
       from among the evil ones; or because of the filthiness of the deed, which one devil would abhor to
       commit. For in many inquiries it is clearly shown that certain devils, out of some nobility in their
       natures, would shrink from a filthy action. Or it may be in order that the Incubus may, instead of a
       man's semen, but interposing himself on to a woman, invisibly inject his own semen, that is, that
       which he has invisibly received. And it is not foreign to his nature or power to effect such an
       interposition; since even in bodily form he can interpose himself invisibly and without physical
       contact, as was shown in the case of young man who has betrothed to an idol.
             Thirdly, it is said that the power of an angel belongs in an infinite degree to the higher things;
       that is to say, that his power cannot be comprehended by the lower orders, but is always superior
       to them, so that it is not limited to one effect only. For the highest powers have most unbounded
       influence over creation. But because he is said to be infinitely superior, that is not to say that he is
       indifferently powerful for any work that is propounded for him; for then he might just as well be
       said to be infinitely inferior, as superior.
             But there must be some proportion between the agent and the patient, and there can be no
       proportion between a purely spiritual substance and a corporeal one. Therefore not even the devils
       have any power to cause an effect, except through some other active medium. And this is why they
       use the seeds of things to produce their effects; see S. Augustine, de Trinitate, 3. Wherefore this
       argument goes back to the preceding one, and is not strengthened by it, unless anyone wishes for
       S. Augustine's explanation why the Intelligences are said to have infinite powers of the higher and
       not of the lower degree, given to them in the order of things corporeal and of the celestial bodies,
       which can influence many and infinite effects. But this is not because of the weakness of the
       inferior powers. And the conclusion is that devils, even without assuming bodies, can work
       transmutations in semen; although this is no argument against the present proposition, concerning
       Incubi and Succubi, whose actions they cannot perform except by assuming bodily shape, as has

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_03b.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:02:52 PM]
Part I, Question III, P.2

       been considered above.
             For the fourth argument, that devils cannot move bodies or semen locally, which is
       substantiated by the analogy of the soul. It must be said that it is one thing to speak of the spiritual
       substance of the actual angel or devil, and another thing to speak of the actual soul. For the reason
       why the soul cannot locally move a body unless it has given life to it, or else by contact of a living
       body with one that is not living, is this: that the soul occupies by far the lowest grade in the order
       of spiritual beings, and therefore it follows that there must be some proportionate relation between
       it and the body which it is able to move by contact. But it is not so with devils, whose power
       altogether exceeds corporeal power.
             And fifthly, it must be said that the contact of a devil with a body, either in the way of semen
       or in any other way, is not a corporeal but a virtual contact, and takes place in accordance with the
       suitable proportion of the devil's power. And such bodies are the celestial bodies, and even the
       whole earth or the elements of the world, the power of which we may call superior on the authority
       of S. Thomas in his questions concerning Sin (quest. 10, de Daemonibus). For this is either
       because of the essence of nature, or because of condemnation for sin. For there is a due order in
       things, in accordance both with their very nature and with their motion. And just as the higher
       heavenly bodies are moved by the higher spiritual substances, as are the good Angels, so are the
       lower bodies moved by the lower spiritual substances, as are the devils. And if this limitation of
       the devils' power is due to the essence of nature, it is held by some that the devils are not of the
       order of those higher angels, but are part of this terrestrial order created by God; and this was the
       opinion of the Philosophers. And if it is due to condemnation for sin, as is held by the Theologians,
       then they were thrust from the regions of heaven into this lower atmosphere for a punishment, and
       therefore are not able to move either it or the earth.
             This has been said on account of two easily dispelled arguments: - One, regarding the
       heavenly bodies, that the devils could also move these, if they were able to move bodies locally,
       since the stars are neared to them in nature, as also the last argument alleges. The answer is that
       this is not valid; for if the former opinion holds good, those bodies exceed the proportion of the
       devils' power: and if the second is true, then again they cannot move them, because of their
       punishment for sin.
             Also there is the argument that objects that the motion of the whole and of the part is the same
       thing, just as Aristotle in his 4th Physics instances the case of the whole earth and a clod of soil;
       and that therefore if the devils could move a part of the earth, they could also move the whole
       earth. But this is not valid, as is clear to anyone who examines the distinction. But to collect the
       semen of things and apply it to certain effects dos not exceed their natural power, with the
       permission of God, as is self-evident.
             In conclusion, in spite of the contention of some that devils in bodily shape can in no way
       generate children, and that by the “sons of God” is meant the descendants of Cain; nevertheless the
       contrary is clearly affirmed by many. And that which seems true to many cannot be altogether
       false, according to Aristotle in his 6th Ethics and at the end of the de Somno et Uigilia. And now
       also in modern times we have the well-attested deeds and words of witches who truly and actually
       perform such things.
             Therefore we make three propositions. First, that the foulest venereal acts are performed by
       such devils, not for the sake of delectation, but for the pollution of the souls and bodies of those to
       whom they act as Succubi and Incubi. Second, that through such action complete contraception
       and generation by women can take place, inasmuch as they can deposit human semen in the
       suitable place of a woman's womb where there is already a corresponding substance. In the same

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_03b.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:02:52 PM]
Part I, Question III, P.2

       way they can also collect the seeds of other things for the working of their effects. Third, that in
       the begetting of such children only the local motion is to be attributed to devils, and not the actual
       begetting, which arises not from the power of the devil or of the body which he assumes, but from
       the virtue of him whose semen it was; wherefore the child is the son not of the devil, but of some
       man.
             And here there is a clear answer to those who would contend that there are two reasons why
       devils cannot generate children: - First, that generation is effected by the formative virtue which
       exists in semen released from a living body; and that because the body assumed by devils is not of
       such a sort, therefore, etc. The answer is clear, that the devil deposits naturally formative semen in
       its proper place, etc. Secondly, it may be argued that semen has no power of generation except as
       long as the heat of life is retained in it, and that this must be lost when it is carried great distances.
       The answer is that devils are able to store the semen safely, so that its vital heat is not lost; or even
       that it cannot evaporate so easily on account of the great speed at which they move by reason of
       the superiority of the move over the thing moved.
                                                                Page 2 of 2


                                                             Question IV

                                                           Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                            HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                    All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_03b.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:02:52 PM]
Notes

              “Bede.” Born 672 or 673, died 735. This great work, “Historia Ecclesiastica Gentis
        Anglorum,” giving an account of Christianity in England from the beginning until his own day,
        has been recognized as a masterpiece by the scholars of all ages and countries. An authoritative
        edition was published by Plummer, two vols., Oxford, 1896.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0035.html [2002-01-20 12:02:52 PM]
Notes

           “William of Paris.” William of Auvergne, was born at Aurillac in Auvergne towards the end of
        the twelfth century, and died at Paris, of which city he had in 1228 been consecrated Bishop, in
        1249. Although not a “Summa Theologica,” his “de Universo” is a practical endeavour to found a
        science of reality on principes opposed to those of the Arabian commentators upon and perverters
        of Aristotle. His theological works are particularly interesting as devoting much attention to a
        refutation of the Manichees, whose heresies had been recently revived. There is a good study by
        Valois, “Guillaume d’Auvergne,” Paris, 1880.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0036.html [2002-01-20 12:02:52 PM]
Part II, Question IV


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                              PART I.
                                                            QUESTION IV.

                       By which Devils are the Operations of Incubus and Succubus Practised?

             Is it Catholic to affirm that the functions of Incubi and Succubi belong indifferently and
       equally to all unclean spirits? And it seems that it is so; for to affirm the opposite would be to
       maintain that there is some good order among them. It is argued that just as in the computation of
       the Good there are degrees and orders (see S. Augustine in his book on the nature of the Good), so
       also the computation of the Evil is based upon confusion. But as among the good Angels nothing
       can be without order, so among the bad all is disorder, and therefore they all indifferently follows
       these practices. See Job x.: A land of darkness, as darkness itself; and of the shadow of death,
       without any order, and where the light is as darkness.
             Again, if they do not all indifferently follow these practices, this quality in them comes either
       from their nature, or from sin, or from punishment. But it does not come from their nature, since
       they are all without distinction given to sin, as was set out in the preceding question. For they are
       by nature impure spirits, yet not so unclean as to pejorate their good parts; subtle in wickedness,
       eager to do harm, swollen with pride, etc. Therefore these practices in them are due either to sin or
       to punishment. Then again, where the sin is greater, there is the punishment greater; and the higher
       angels sinned more greatly, therefore their punishment they have the more to follow these filthy
       practices. If this is not so, another reason will be given why they do not indifferently practise these
       things.
             And again, it is argued that where there is no discipline or obedience, there all work without
       distinction; and it is submitted that there is no discipline or obedience among devils, and no
       agreement. Proverbs xiii.: Among the proud there is always contention.
             Again, just as because of sin they will all equally be case into Hell after the Day of
       Judgement, so before that time they are detained in the lower mists on account of the duties
       assigned to them. We do not read that there is equality on account of emancipation, therefore
       neither is there equality in the matter of duty and temptation.
             But against this there is the first gloss on I Corinthians xv: As long as the world endures
       Angels are set over Angels, men over men, and devils over devils. Also in Job xl it speaks of the
       scales of Leviathan, which signify the members of the devil, how one cleaves to another. Therefore
       there is among them diversity both of order and of action.
             Another question arises, whether or not the devils can be restrained by the good Angels from
       pursuing these foul practices. It must be said that the Angels to whose command the adverse
       Influences are subject are called Powers, as S. Gregory says, and S. Augustine (de Trinitate, 3). A
       rebellious and sinful spirit of life is subject to an obedient, pious and just spirit of life. And those
       Creatures which are more perfect and nearer to God have authority over the others: for the whole
       order of preference is originally and in the first place in God, and is shared by His creatures


file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_04a.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:02:53 PM]
Part II, Question IV

       according as they approach more nearly to Him. Therefore the good Angels, who are nearest to
       God on account of their fruition in Him, which the devils lack, have preference over the devils, and
       rule over them.
             And when it is urged that devils work much harm without any medium, or that they are not
       hindered because they are not subject to good Angels who might prevent them; or that if they are
       so subject, then the evil that is done by the subject is due to negligence on the part of the master,
       and there seems to be some negligence among the good Angels: the answer is that the Angels are
       ministers of the Divine wisdom. It follows then that, as the Divine wisdom permits certain evil to
       be done by bad Angels or men, for the sake of the good that He draws therefrom, so also the good
       Angels do not altogether prevent wicked men or devils from doing evil.
             Answer. It is Catholic to maintain that there is a certain order of interior and exterior actions,
       and a degree of preference among devils. Whence it follows that certain abominations are
       committed by the lowest orders, from which the higher orders are precluded on account of the
       nobility of their natures. And this is generally said to arise from a threefold congruity, in that such
       things harmonize with their nature, with the Divine wisdom, and with their own wickedness.
             But more particularly as touching their nature. It is agreed that from the beginning of Creation
       some were always by nature superior, since they differ among themselves as to form; and no two
       Angels are alike in form. This follows the more general opinion, which also agrees with the words
       of the Philosophers. Dionysus also lays it down in his tenth chapter On the Celestial Hierarchy
       that in the same order there are three separate degrees; and we must agree with this, since they are
       both immaterial and incorporeal. See also S. Thomas (ii. 2). For sin does not take away their
       nature, and the devils after the Fall did not lose their natural gifts, as has been said before; and the
       operations of things follow their natural conditions. Therefore both in nature and in operation they
       are various and multiple.
             This harmonizes also with the Divine wisdom; for that which is ordained is ordained by God
       (Romans xiii). And since devils were deputed by God for the temptation of men and the
       punishment of the damned, therefore they work upon men from without by many and various
       means.
             It harmonizes also with their own wickedness. For since they are at war with the human race,
       they fight in an orderly manner; for so they think to do greater harm to men, and so they do.
       Whence it follows that they do not share in an equal manner in their most unspeakable
       abominations.
             And this is more specifically proved as follows. For since, as has been said, the operation
       follows the nature of the thing, it follows also that those whose natures are subordinate must in
       turn be subordinate to themselves in operation, just as is the case in corporeal matters. For since
       the lower bodies are by natural ordination below the celestial bodies, and their actions and motions
       are subject to the actions and motions of the celestial bodies; and since the devils, as has been said,
       differ among themselves in natural order; therefore they also differ among themselves in their
       natural actions, both extrinsic and instrinsic, and especially in the performance of the abominations
       in question.
             From which it is concluded that since the practice of these abominations is for the most part
       foreign to the nobility of the angelic nature, so also in human actions the foulest and beastliest acts
       are to be considered by themselves, and not in relation to the duty of human nature and
       procreation.
             Finally, since some are believed to have fallen from every order, it is not unsuitable to
       maintain that those devils who fell from the lowest choir, and even in that held the lowest rank, are

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_04a.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:02:53 PM]
Part II, Question IV

       deputed to and perform these and other abominations.
             Also it must be carefully noted that, though the Scripture speaks of Incubi and Succubi
       lusting after women, yet nowhere do we read that Incubi and Succubi fell into vices against nature.
       We do not speak only of sodomy, but of any other sin whereby the act is wrongfully performed
       outside the rightful channel. And the very great enormity of such as sin in this way is shown by the
       fact that all devils equally, of whatsoever order, abominate and think shame to commit such
       actions. And it seems that the gloss on Ezekiel xix means this, where it says: I will give thee into
       the hands of the dwellers in Palestine, that is devils, who shall blush at your iniquities, meaning
       vices against nature. And the student will see what should be authoritatively understood
       concerning devils. For no sin has God so often punished by the shameful death of multitudes.
             Indeed many say, and it is truly believed, that no one can unimperilled persevere in the
       practice of such vices beyond the period of the mortal life of Christ, which lasted for thirty-three
       years, unless he should be saved by some special grace of the Redeemer. And this is proved by the
       fact that there have often been ensnared by this vice octogenarians and centenarians, who had up to
       that time ruled their lives according to the discipline of Christ; and, having forsaken Him, they
       have found the very greatest difficulty in obtaining deliverance, and in abandoning themselves to
       such vices.
             Moreover, the names of the devils indicate what order there is among them, and what office is
       assigned to each. For though one and the same name, that of devil, is generally used in Scripture
       because of their various qualities, yet the Scriptures teach that One is set over these filthy actions,
       just as certain other vices are subject to Another. For it is the practice of Scripture and of speech to
       name every unclean spirit Diabolus, from Dia, that is Two, and Bolus, that is Morsel; for he kills
       two thing, the body and the soul. And this is in accordance with etymology, although in Greek
       Diabolus means shut in Prison, which also is apt, since he is not permitted to do as much harm as
       he wishes. Or Diabolus may mean Downflowing, since he flowed down, that is, fell down, both
       specifically and locally. He is also named Demon, that is, Cunning over Blood, since he thirsts for
       and procures sin with a threefold knowledge, being powerful in the subtlety of his nature, in his
       age-long experience, and in the revelation of the good spirits. He is called also Belial, which
       means Without Yoke or Master; for he can fight against him to whom he should be subject. He is
       called also Beelzebub, which means Lord of Flies, that is, of the souls of sinners who have left the
       true faith of Christ. Also Satan, that is, the Adversary; see I S. Peter ii: For your adversary the
       devil goeth about, etc. Also Behemoth, that is, Beast, because he makes men bestial.
             But the very devil of Fornication, and the chief of that abomination, is called Asmodeus,
       which means the Creature of Judgement: for because of this kind of sin a terrible judgement was
       executed upon Sodom and the four other cities. Similarly the devil of Pride is called Leviathan,
       which means Their Addition; because when Lucifer tempted our first parents he promised them,
       out of his pride, the addition of Divinity. Concerning him the Lord said through Esaias: I shall visit
       it upon Leviathan, that old and tortuous serpent. And the devil of Avarice and Riches is called
       Mammon, whom also Christ mentions in the Gospel (S. Matthew vi): Ye cannot serve God, etc.
             To the arguments. First, that good can be found without evil, but evil cannot be found without
       good; for it is poured upon a creature that is good in itself. And therefore the devils, in so far as
       they have a good nature, were ordained in the course of nature; and for their actions see Job x.
             Secondly, it can be said that the devils deputed to work are not in Hell, but in the lower mists.
       And they have here an order among themselves, which they will not have in Hell. From which it
       may be said that all order ceased among them, as touching the attainment of blessedness, at that
       time when they fell irrecoverably from such rank. And it may be said that even in Hell there will

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_04a.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:02:53 PM]
Part II, Question IV

       be among them a gradation of power, and of the affliction of punishments, inasmuch as some, and
       not others, will be deputed to torment the souls. But this gradation will come rather from God than
       from themselves, as will also their torments.
            Thirdly, when it is said that the higher devils, because they sinned the more, are the more
       punished, and must therefore be the more bound to the commission of these filthy acts, it is
       answered that sin bears relation to punishment, and not to the act or operation of nature; and
       therefore it is by reason of their nobility of nature that these are not given to such filthiness, and it
       has nothing to do with their sin or punishment. And though they are all impure spirits, and eager to
       do harm, yet one is more so than another, in proportion as their natures are the further thrust into
       darkness.
            Fourthly, it is said that there is agreement among devils, but of wickedness rather than
       friendship, in that they hate mankind, and strive their utmost against justice. For such agreement is
       found among the wicked, that they band themselves together, and depute those whose talents seem
       suitable to the pursuit of particular iniquities.
            Fifthly, although imprisonment is equally decreed for all, now in the lower atmosphere and
       afterwards in Hell, yet not therefore are equal penalties and duties equally ordained for them: for
       the nobler they are in nature and the more potent in office, the heavier is the torment to which they
       are subjected. See Wisdom vi: “The powerful shall powerfully suffer torments.”
                                                                Page 1 of 1


                                                              Question V

                                                           Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                       HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                               All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_04a.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:02:53 PM]
Part I, Question V - P.1


                                   THE
                           MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                               PART I.
                                                             QUESTION V.

    What is the Source of the Increase of Works of Witchcraft? Whence comes it that the Practice of
                                 Witchcraft hath so notably increased?

             Is it in any way a Catholic opinion to hold that the origin and growth of witchcraft proceed
       from the influence of the celestial bodies; or from the abundant wickedness of men, and not from
       the abominations of Incubi and Succubi? And it seems that it springs from man's own wickedness.
       For S. Augustine says, in Book LXXXIII, that the cause of a man's depravity lies in his own will,
       whether he sins at his own or at another's suggestion. But a witch is depraved through sin,
       therefore the cause of it is not the devil but human will. In the same place he speaks of free-will,
       that everyone is the cause of his own wickedness. And he reasons thus: that the sin of man
       proceeds from free-will, but the devil cannot destroy free-will, for this would militate against
       liberty: therefore the devil cannot be the cause of that or any other sin. Again, in the book of
       Ecclesiastic Dogma it is said: Not all our evil thoughts are stirred up by the devil, but sometimes
       they arise from the operation of our own judgement.
             Again, if the stars were not the cause of human actions both good and bad, Astrologers would
       not so frequently foretell the truth about the result of wars and other human acts: therefore they are
       in some way a cause.
             Again, the stars influence the devils themselves in the causing of certain spells; and therefore
       they can all the more influence men. Three proofs are adduced for this assumption. For certain
       men who are called Lunatics are molested by devils more at one time than at another; and the
       devils would not so behave, but would rather molest them at all times, unless they themselves were
       deeply affected by certain phases of the Moon. It is proved again from the fact the Necromancers
       observe certain constellations for the invoking of devils, which they would not do unless they
       knew that those devils were subject to the stars.
             And this is also adduced as a proof; that according to S. Augustine (de Ciuitate Dei, 10), the
       devils employ certain lower bodies, such as herbs, stones, animals, and certain sounds and voices,
       and figures. But since the heavenly bodies are of more potency than the lower bodies, therefore the
       stars are a far greater influence than these things. And witches are the more in subjection in that
       their deeds proceed from the influence of those bodies, and not from the help of evil spirits. And
       the argument is supported from I Kings xvi, where Saul was vexed by a devil, but was calmed
       when David struck his harp before him, and the evil departed.
             But against this. It is impossible to produce an effect without its cause; and the deeds of
       witches are such that they cannot be done without the help of devils, as is shown by the description
       of witches in S. Isidore, Ethics VIII. WItches are so called from the enormity of their magic spells;
       for they disturb the elements and confound the minds of men, and without any venomous draught,
       but merely by virtue of incantations, destroy souls, etc. But this sort of effects cannot be caused by


file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_05a.html (1 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:02:54 PM]
Part I, Question V - P.1

       the influence of the stars through the agency of a man.
             Besides, Aristotle says in his Ethics that it is difficult to know what is the beginning of the
       operation of thought, and shows that it must be something extrinsic. For everything that begins
       from a beginning has some cause. Now a man begins to do that which he wills; and he begins to
       will because of some pre-suggestion; and if this is some precedent suggestion, it must either
       proceed from the infinite, or there is some extrinsic beginning which first brings a suggestion to a
       man. Unless indeed it be argued that this is a matter of chance, from which it would follow that all
       human actions are fortuitous, which is absurd. Therefore the beginning of good in the good is said
       to be God, Who is not the cause of sin. But for the wicked, when a man begins to be influenced
       towards and wills to commit sin, there must also be some extrinsic cause of this. And this can be
       no other than the devil; especially in the case of witches, as is shown above, for the stars cannot
       influence such acts. Therefore the truth is plain.
             Moreover, that which has power over the motive has also power over the result which is
       caused by the motive. Now the motive of the will is something perceived through the sense or the
       intellect, both of which are subject to the power of the devil. For S. Augustine says in Book 83:
       This evil, which is of the devil, creeps in by all the sensual approaches; he places himself in
       figures, he adapts himself to colours, he attaches himself to sounds, he lurks in angry and wrongful
       conversation, he abides in smells, he impregnates with flavours and fills with certain exhalations
       all the channels of the understanding. Therefore it is seen that it is in the devil's power to influence
       the will, which is directly the cause of sin.
             Besides, everything which has a choice of two ways needs some determining factor before it
       proceeds to the action. And the free-will of man has the choice between good and ill; therefore
       when he embarks upon sin, it needs that he is determined by something towards ill. And this seems
       chiefly to be done by the devil, especially in the actions of witches, whose will is made up for evil.
       Therefore it seems that the evil will of the devil is the cause of evil will in man, especially in
       witches. And the argument may be substantiated thus; that just as a good Angel cleaves to good, so
       does a bad Angel to evil; but the former leads a man into goodness, therefore the latter leads him
       into evil. For it is, says Dionysius, the unalterable and fixed law of divinity, that the lowest has it
       cause in the highest.
             Answer. Such as contend that witchcraft has its origin in the influence of the stars stand
       convicted of three errors. In the first place, it is not possible that it originated from astromancers
       and casters of horoscopes and fortune-tellers. For if it is asked whether the vice of witchcraft in
       men is caused by the influence of the stars, then, in consideration of the variety of men's
       characters, and for the upholding of the true faith, a distinction must be maintained; namely, that
       there are two ways in which it can be understood that men's characters can be caused by the stars.
       Either completely and of necessity, or by disposition and contingency. And as for the first, it is not
       only false, but so heretical and contrary to the Christian religion, that the true faith cannot be
       maintained in such an error. For this reason, he who argues that everything of necessity proceeds
       from the stars takes away all merit and, in consequence, all blame: also he takes away Grace, and
       therefore Glory. For uprightness of character suffers prejudice by this error, since the blame of the
       sinner redounds upon the stars, licence to sin without culpability is conceded, and man is
       committed to the worship and adoration of the stars.
             But as for the contention that men's characters are conditionally varied by the disposition of
       the stars, it is so far true that is it not contrary to reason or faith. For it is obvious that the
       disposition of a body variously causes many variations in the humours and character of the soul;
       for generally the soul imitates the complexions of the body, as it said in the Six Principles.

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_05a.html (2 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:02:54 PM]
Part I, Question V - P.1

       Wherefore the choleric are wrathful, the sanguine are kindly, the melancholy are envious, and the
       phlegmatic are slothful. But this is not absolute; for the soul is master of its body, especially when
       it is helped by Grace. And we see many choleric who are gently, and melancholy who are kindly.
       Therefore when the virtue of the stars influences the formation and quality of a man's humours, it
       is agreed that they have some influence over the character, but very distantly: for the virtue of the
       lower nature has more effect on the quality of the humours than has the virtue of the stars.
              Wherefore S. Augustine (de Ciuitate Dei, V), where he resolves a certain question of two
       brothers who fell ill and were cured simultaneously, approves the reasoning of Hippocrates rather
       than that of an Astronomer. For Hippocrates answered that it is owing to the similarity of their
       humours; and the Astronomer answered that it was owing the identity of their horoscopes. For the
       Physician's answer was better, since he adduced the more powerful and immediate cause. Thus,
       therefore, it must be said that the influence of the stars is to some degree conducive to the
       wickedness of witches, if it be granted that there is any such influence over the bodies that
       predisposes them to this manner of abomination rather than to any other sort of works either
       vicious or virtuous: but this disposition must not be said to be necessary, immediate, and
       sufficient, but remote and contingent.
              Neither is that objection valid which is based on the book of the Philosophers on the
       properties of the elements, where it says that kingdoms are emptied and lands depopulated at the
       conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn; and it is argued from this that such things are to be understood
       as being outside the free-will of men, and that therefore the influence of the stars has power over
       free-will. For it is answered that in this saying the Philosopher does not mean to imply that men
       cannot resist the influence of that constellation towards dissensions, but that they will not. For
       Ptolemy in Almagest says: A wise man will be the master of the stars. For although, since Saturn
       has a melancholy and bad influence and Jupiter a very good influence, the conjunction of Jupiter
       and Saturn can dispose men to quarrels and discords; yet, through free-will, men can resist that
       inclination, and very easily with the help of God's grace.
              And again it is no valid objection to quote S. John Damascene where he says (Book II, chap.
       vi) that comets are often the sign of the death of kings. For it will be answered that even if we
       follow the opinion of S. John Damascene, which was, as is evident in the book referred to,
       contrary to the opinion of the Philosophic Way, yet this is no proof of the inevitability of human
       actions. For S. John considers that a comet is not a natural creation, nor is it one of the stars set in
       the firmament; wherefore neither its significance nor influence is natural. For he says that comets
       are not of the stars which were created in the beginning, but that they are made for a particular
       occasion, and then dissolved, by Divine command. This then is the opinion of S. John Damascene.
       But God by such a sign foretells the death of kings rather than of other men, both because from
       this may arise the confusion of a kingdom. And the Angels are more careful to watch over kings
       for the general good; and kings are born and die under the ministry of Angels.
              And there is no difficulty in the opinion of the Philosophers, who say that a comet is a hot and
       dry conglomeration, generated in the higher part of space near the fire, and that a conjoined globe
       of that hot and dry vapour assumes the likeness of a star. But unincorporated parts of that vapour
       stretch in long extremities joined to that globe, and are a sort of adjunct to it. And according to this
       view, not of itself but by accident, it predicts death which proceeds from hot and dry infirmities.
       And since for the most part the rich are fed on things of a hot and dry nature, therefore at such
       times many of the rich die; among which the death of kings and princes is the most notable. And
       this view is not far from the view of S. John Damascene, when carefully considered, except as


file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_05a.html (3 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:02:54 PM]
Part I, Question V - P.1

       regards the operation and co-operation of the Angels, which not even the philosophers can ignore.
       For indeed when the vapours in their dryness and heat have nothing to do with the generation of a
       comet, even then, for reasons already set out, a comet may be formed by the operation of an Angel.
             In this way the star which portended the death of the learned S. Thomas was not one of the
       stars set in the firmament, but was formed by an Angel from some convenient material, and,
       having performed it office, was again dissolved.
             From this we see that, whichever of those opinions we follow, the stars have no inherent
       influence over the free-will, or, consequently, over the malice and character of men.
             It is to be noted also that Astronomers often foretell the truth, and that their judgements are
       for the most part effective on one province or one nation. And the reason is that they take their
       judgements from the stars, which, according to the more probable view, have a greater, though not
       an inevitable, influence over the actions of mankind in general, that is, over one nation or
       province, than over one individual person; and this because the greater part of one nation more
       closely obeys the natural disposition of the body than does one single man. But this is mentioned
       incidentally.
             And the second of the three ways by which we vindicate the Catholic standpoint is by
       refuting the errors of those who cast Horoscopes and Mathematicians who worship the goddess of
       fortune. Of these S. Isidore (Ethics, VIII. 9) says that those who cast Horoscopes are so called
       from their examination of the stars at nativity, and are commonly called Mathematicians; and in
       the same Book, chapter 2, he says that Fortune has her name from fortuitousness. and is a sort of
       goddess who mocks human affairs in a haphazard and fortuitous manner. Wherefore she is called
       blind, since she runs here and there with no consideration for desert, and comes indifferently to
       good and bad. So much for Isidore. But to believe that there is such a goddess, or that the harm
       done to bodies and creatures which is ascribed to witchcraft does not actually proceed from
       witchcraft, but from that same goddess of Fortune, is sheer idolatry: and also to assert that witches
       themselves were born for that very purpose that they might perform such deeds in the world is
       similarly alien to the Faith, and indeed to the general teaching of the Philosophers. Anyone who
       pleases may refer to S. Thomas in the 3rd book of his Summa of the Faith against the Gentiles.
       question 87, etc., and he will find much to this effect.
             Nevertheless one point must not be omitted, for the sake of those who perhaps have not great
       quantity of books. It is there noted that three things are to be considered in man, which are directed
       by three celestial causes, namely, the act of the will, the act of the intellect, and the act of the body.
       The first of these is governed directly and soley by God, the second by an Angel, and the third by a
       celestial body. For choice and will are directly governed by God for good works, as the Scripture
       says in Proverbs xxi: The heart of the king is in the hand of the Lord; he turneth it whithersoever
       he will. And it says “the heart of the king” to signify that, as the great cannot oppose His will, so
       are others even less able to do so. Also S. Paul says: God who causeth us to wish and to perform
       that which is good.
                                                                Page 1 of 3




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_05a.html (4 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:02:54 PM]
Part I, Question V - P.1

                                               Question V Continued . . . .

                                                           Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                           HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                   All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_05a.html (5 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:02:54 PM]
Notes

           “Almagest.” Claudius Prolemaus was a celebrated mathematician, astronomer, and
        geographer. Of the details of his life nothing appears to be known beyond the facts that he was
        certainly at Alexandria in A.D. 139, and since he survived Antoninus Pius he was alive later that
        March, 161. His “Geography,”                                 is very famous, but perhaps even more
        celebrated was the                                                  , usually known by its Arabic
        name of Almagest. Since the “Tetrabiblus,” the work on astrology, was also entitled                     ,
        the Arabs, to distinguish between the two, called the greater work              , and afterwards
                     ; the title “Almagest” is a compound of this last adjective and the Arabic articels. The
        work is divided into thirteen books, of which VII and VIII are the most interesting to the modern
        astronomer, as they give a catalogue of the stars. The best edition of the “Almagest” is considered
        to be that by Halma, Paris, 1813-16, two vols., 4to.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0037.html [2002-01-20 12:02:54 PM]
Notes

          “Sapiens homo dominabitur astris.” This famous tag is continually quoted. Cf. Tomkis'
        “Albumazar” (acted at Cambridge, March, 1615), I, 7, where Albumazar says:
               Indeed th' Ægyptian Ptolemy, the wise,
               Pronounc'd it as an oracle of truth,
                Sapiens dominabitur astris.
        In Book III, Epigram 186, of John Owen's first published volume, we get:
                 “Fata regunt reges; sapiens dominabitur astris.”
        Sir Sampson Legend in Congreve's “Love for Love,” was produced at Lincoln's Inn Fields, 30
        April, 1695, II, I, bantering old Foresight, who loudly acclaims the influence of the stars, throws at
        him: “I tell you I am wise; and sapiens dominabitur astrust; there's Latin for you to prove it.”
        According to W. Aldis Wright's note on Bacon's “Advancement of Learning,” II, xxiii, 12: “Mr.
        Ellis says this sentence is ascribed to Prolemy by Cognatus.” The reference is to Cognati's
        collection of Adages, which together with the “Adagia” of Erasmus and other famous repertories
        of saws and proverbs may be found in the voluma “Adagia” compiled by Joynaeus. Joannes
        Nevizanus, “Sylva Nuptialis,” II, 96, notes: “Dicit tamen Bal. in c.j. at lite pand. quod sapiens
        dominabitur astrist.” Bal. is Baldus, Baldo degli Ubaldi (b. 1327), the most famous canonist of his
        day and Professor utriusque iuris at the Universities of Padua, Perugia, and Piacenza, who wrote
        ample glosses on the “Corpus Iuris Ciuilis.” Burton, “Anatomy of Melancholy,” quotes
        “spapiens,” etc., and A.R. Shilleto in his notes says that it is also cited by Jeremy Taylor, and that
        C.G. Eden, his best editor, could not trace the origin of the phrase.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0038.html [2002-01-20 12:02:55 PM]
Notes

           “S. John.” S. John Damascene, Doctor of the Church, was born at Damascus about 676, and
        died some time between 754 and 787. The quotation is from
                      , which is the third part of the most important of all his works,               ,
        Fountain of Wisdom. This third part, “The Orthodox Faith,” to which reference is made here,
        must be considered the most notable of all writings of S. John Damascene, and it is in this treatise
        that he discloses so comprehensive a knowledge of the astronomy of his day. It may be pointed out
        that Sprenger regards the authority of S. John far too lightly, for the Doctor's words carry great
        weight. The only complete edition of the works of S. John Damascene is that by Michael Lequien,
        O.P., published at Paris, 1717, and Venice, 1748. Migne has reprinted this, “Patres Græci,”
        XCIV-XCVI, with the addition of certain works by some attributed to the same author.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0039.html [2002-01-20 12:02:55 PM]
Notes

            “Mathematicians.” Although in Cicero and in Seneca “mathematicus” means a
        mathematician, in later Latin it always signifies an astrologer, a diviner, a wizard. The
        “Mathematici” were condemned by the Roman law as exponents of black magic. Their art is
        indeed forbidden in severest terms by Diocletian (A.D. 284-305): “Artem geometriae discere
        atque exervere oublice interest, ars autem mathematica damnabilis interdicta est omnino.” The
        world “mathematician” was used in English sometimes to denote an astrologer, a fortune-teller.
        So in Shirley's comedy “The Sisters,” III, licensed April 1642, when the bandist disguised as
        diviners visit the castle, Giovanni enters crying out: “Master Steward, yonder are the rarest
        fellows! In such fantastical habits, too; they call themselves mathematicians.” “What do they come
        for?” the steward asks. “To offer their service to my Lady, and tell fortunes,” is the reply. When
        Antonio sees them he grumbles:
        Her house is open for these mountebanks,
        Cheaters, and tumblers, that can foist and flatter
        My Lady Gewgaw. . .
        What are you, sir?
          Strozzo. One of the mathematicians, noble signior.
          Antonio. Mathematicians! mongrel,
        How durst thou take that learned name upon thee?
        Your are one of those knaves that stroll the country,
        And live by picking worms out of fools' fingers.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0040.html [2002-01-20 12:02:56 PM]
Part I, Question V - P.2


                                   THE
                           MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                        PART I.
                                               QUESTION V. CONTINUED . . . .

             The human understanding is governed by God through the mediation of an Angel. And those
       bodily actions, either exterior or interior, which are natural to man, are regulated by God through
       the mediation of the Angels and the celestial bodies. For blessed Dionysius (de Diuin. nom., IV)
       says that the celestial bodies are the causes of that which happens in this world; though he makes
       no implication of fatality.
             And since man is governed as to his body by the celestial bodies, as to his intellect by the
       Angels, and as to his will by God, it may happen that if he rejects God's inspiration towards
       goodness, and the guidance of his bodily affections to those things toward which the influence of
       the stars inclines him, that so his will and understanding become entangled in malice and error.
             However, it is not possible for anyone to be influenced by the stars to enter upon that sort of
       error in which the witches are ensnared, such as bloodshed, theft or robbery, or even the
       perpetration of the worst incontinences; and this is true of other natural phenomena.
             Also, as William of Paris says in his De Universo, it is proved by experience that if a harlot
       tries to plant an olive it does not become fruitful, whereas if it is planted by a chaste woman it is
       fruitful. And a doctor in healing, a farmer in planting, or a soldier in fighting can do more with the
       help of the influence of the stars than another who possesses the same skill can do.
             Our third way is taken from the refutation of the belief in Fate. And here it is to be noted that
       a belief in Fate is in one way quite Catholic, but in another way entirely heretical. For Fate may be
       understood after the manner of certain Gentiles and Mathematicians, who thought that the different
       characters of men were inevitably caused by the force of the position of the stars, so that a wizard
       was predestined to be such, even if he were of a good character, because the disposition of the stars
       under which he was conceived or born caused him to be such as he was. And that force they called
       by the name of Fate.
             But that opinion is not only false, but heretical and altogether detestable on account of the
       deprivation which it must entail, as was shown above in the refutation of the first error. For by it
       would be removed all reason for merit or blame, for grace and glory, and God would be made the
       author of our evil, and more such incongruities. Therefore such conception of Fate must be
       altogether rejected, since there is no such thing. And touching this belief S. Gregory says in his
       Homily on the Epiphany: Far be it from the hearts of the faithful to say that there is any Fate.
             And although, on account of the same incongruity which is detected in both, this opinion may
       seem to be the same as that concerning the Astrologers, they are yet different inasmuch as they
       disagree concerning the force of the stars and the influx of the seven Planets.
             But Fate may be considered to be a sort of second disposition, or an ordination of second
       causes for the production of foreseen Divine effects. And in this way Fate is truly something. For
       the providence of God accomplishes His effects through mediating cause, in such matters are
       subject to second causes; though this is not so in the case of some other matters, such as the


file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_05b.html (1 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:02:56 PM]
Part I, Question V - P.2

       creation of souls, glorification, and the acquisition of grace.
             Also the Angels may co-operate in the infusion of Grace by enlightening and guiding the
       understanding and the capability of the will, and so a certain arrangement of results may be said to
       be one and the same of Providence or even Fate. For it is considered in this way; that there is in
       God a quality which may be called Providence, or it may be said that He has ordained
       intermediary causes for the realization of some of His purposes; and to this extent Fate is a rational
       fact. And in this way Boethius speaks of Fate (de Consolatione IV): Fate is an inherent disposition
       in things mobile, by which Providence binds things to that which It has ordained.
             Nevertheless the learned Saints refused to use this name, on account of those who twisted its
       meaning to force of the position of the stars. Wherefore S. Augustine (de Ciuitate Dei, V) says: If
       anyone attributed human affairs to Fate, meaning by Fate the Will and Power of God, let him keep
       his opinion but amend his tongue.
             It is clear, then, that what has been said provides a sufficient answer to the question whether
       all things, including works of witchcraft, are subject to Fate. For if Fate is said to be the
       ordainment of second cause of foreseen Divine results, that is, when God wills to effect His
       purposes through second causes; to that extent they are subject to Fate, that is, to second causes so
       ordained by God; and the influence of the stars is one of these second causes. But those things
       which come directly from God, such as the Creation of things, the Glorification of things
       substantial and spiritual, and other things of this sort, are not subject to such Fate. And Boethius, in
       the book we have quoted, supports this view when he says that those things which are near to the
       primal Deity are beyond the influence of the decrees of Fate. Therefore the works of witches,
       being outside the common cause and order of nature, are not subject to these second causes. That
       is to say, that as regards their origin they are not subject to willy-nilly Fate, but to other causes.

                                   Witchcraft is not caused by the Powers that Move the Stars

             It follows that, just as witchcraft cannot be caused in the manner that has been suggested, so
       also it is not caused by the separate Essences which are the Powers that move the stars; although
       this was believed to be the case by Avicenna and his school, for the following reasons. For they
       argued those are separate Essences of a higher power than our souls; and the soul itself can
       sometimes, by the force of imagination, or merely through fear, effect a change in its own body.
       For example, a man walking on a plank place at a great height easily falls, but in his fear he
       imagines that he will fall; but if the plank were placed on the ground he would not fall, for he
       would have no reason to fear falling. So by the mere apprehension of the soul the body grows hot
       in the case of the concupiscent and wrathful, and cold in the case of the fearful. It can also, by
       strongly imagining and fearing such things, be affected with illnesses, such as fever and leprosy.
       And as with its own body, so it can influence another body either for health or sickness; and to this
       is ascribed the cause of bewitchment, of which we have spoken above.
             And since according to that view the deeds of witches have to be attributed to the Powers that
       move the stars, if not precisely to the stars themselves; therefore we must add to what we have
       already said on this subject, that this also is impossible. For the Powers that move the stars are
       good and intelligent Essences, not only by nature but also by will, as appears from their working
       for the good of the whole universe. But that creature by whose aid witchcraft is done, although it
       may be good in nature, cannot be good by will. Therefore it is impossible to hold the same
       judgement of both these Essences.
             And that such an Essence cannot be good in respect of will is proved as follows. For it is no

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_05b.html (2 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:02:56 PM]
Part I, Question V - P.2

       part of a well-disposed intelligence to extend patronage to those who act against virtue; and of
       such sort are the actions of witches. For it will be shown in the Second Part that they commit
       murders, fornications, and sacrifices of children and animals, and for their evil deeds are called
       witches. Therefore the Intelligence by whose aid such witchcraft is performed cannot be
       well-disposed towards virtue; although it may be good in its original nature, since all things are so,
       as is evident to anyone who thinks about it. Also it is no part of a good Intelligence to be the
       familiar spirit of criminals, and to extend patronage to them and not to the virtuous. For they are
       criminals who use witchcraft, and they are known by their works.
              Now the natural function of the Essences that move the stars is to influence any creature for
       good, although it often happens that it becomes corrupted by come accident. Therefore those
       Essences cannot be the original cause of witches.
              Besides, it is the part of a good spirit to lead men to that which is good in human nature, and
       of good repute; therefore to entice men away from such, and to betray them into evil things,
       belongs to an evilly-disposed spirit. And by the wiles of such a spirit men make no headway in
       those things which are worthy, such as the sciences and virtues, but rather in that which is evil,
       such as the knowledge of theft and a thousand other crimes; therefore the origin is not in these
       separate Essences, but in some Power evilly disposed toward virtue.
              Besides, that cannot be understood to be a well-disposed spirit in the commission of crimes.
       But this is what happens in the deeds of witches; for, as will be shown by their performances, they
       abjure the Faith, and slay innocent children. For the separate Essences which move the stars do
       not, on account of their goodness, provide help in these works if witchcraft.
              In conclusion, then; this kind of works can no more arise from the Movers of the stars than
       from the stars themselves. And since they must originate from some Power allied to some creature,
       and that Power cannot be good in its will, although it may be naturally good, and that the devils
       themselves answer to this description, it follows that it is by their power that such things are done.
              Unless, indeed, anyone should bring forward the trifling objection that witchcraft originates
       in human malice, and that it is effected by curses, and the placings of images in a certain place, the
       stars being favourable. For example, a certain witch placed her image and said to a woman, “I will
       make you blind and lame”; and it happened so. But it happened because the woman from her
       nativity was destined by the stars for such an affliction; and if such words and practices had been
       used against anyone else, they would not have been effective. And to this I shall answer in detail;
       first, that such witchcrafts cannot be caused by human malice; secondly, that they cannot be
       caused by magic words or images, whatever stars may be in concurrence.

                                      Witchcraft does not operate from Human Malice alone.

              And first to prove that witches' works cannot arise from human malice, however great. For a
       man's malice may be either habitual, inasmuch as by frequent practice he acquires a habit that
       inclines him to commit sin, not from ignorance but from weakness; in which case he is held to sin
       from wickedness. Or it may be actual malice, by which is meant the deliberate choice of evil,
       which is called the sin against the Holy Ghost. But in neither case can he, without the help of some
       higher Power, work such spells as the mutation of the elements, or the harming of the bodies both
       of men and beasts. And this is proved first as to the cause, and secondly as to the effect of
       witchcraft.
              For a man cannot effect such works without malice, that is, a weakening of his nature, and
       still less when his nature has already been weakened; as is clear, since his active virtue is already

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_05b.html (3 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:02:56 PM]
Part I, Question V - P.2

       diminished. But man, through all sorts of sin and wickedness, becomes weakened in his natural
       goodness. Both reason and authority prove this. For Dionysius (de Diuin. Nom. IV) says: Sin is the
       effect of natural habit; and he speaks of the sin of guilt. Wherefore no one who is conscious of sin
       commits it, unless he does so out of deliberate revolt.
             I answer thus. The sin of guilt stands in the same relation to the good of nature as does the
       good of grace to the sin of nature. But by grace is diminished natural sin, which is as a tinder prone
       to guilt; therefore much more is natural good diminished by guilt. And it is not valid to put forward
       the objection that a bewitchment is sometimes caused by an old woman evilly looking at a child,
       by which the child is changed and bewitched. For, as has already been shown, this can only
       happen to children because of their tender complexion. But here we speak of the bodies of all sorts
       of men and beasts, and even the elements and hailstorms. If anyone wishes to inquire further, he
       may refer to S. Thomas in his questions concerning Evil: Whether sin can corrupt the whole
       natural good, etc.
             And now as regards the effects of witchcraft. From the effects we arrive at a knowledge of the
       cause. Now these effects, as they concerns us, are outside the order of created nature as known to
       us, and are done through the power of some creature unknown to us, although they are not
       miracles, which are things done outside the order of the whole of created nature. As for miracles,
       they are wrought by His power Who is above the whole order of the entire natural creation, Which
       is the Blessed God; as it is said: Thou are He Who alone workest great marvels. So also the works
       of witches are said to be miraculous only inasmuch as they are done by some cause unknown to us,
       and outside the order of created nature as known to us. From which it follows that the corporeal
       virtue of a man cannot extend itself to the causation of such works; for it has always this quality,
       that the cause with the natural effect is, in the case of man, recognized naturally and without
       wonder.
             And that the works of witches can in some way be called miraculous, in so far as they exceed
       human knowledge, is clear from their very nature; for they are not done naturally. It is shown also
       by all the Doctors, especially S. Augustine in Book LXXXIII, where he says that by magic arts
       many miracles are wrought similar to those miracles which are done by the servants of God. And
       again in the same book he says that Magicians do miracles by private contract, good Christians by
       public justice, and bad Christians by the signs of public justice. And all this is explained as
       follows. For there is a Divine justice in the whole universe, just as there is a public law in the
       State. But the virtue of any creature has to do with the universe ,as that of the private individual
       has to do with the State. Therefore inasmuch as good Christians work miracles by Divine justice,
       they are said to work them by public justice. But the Magician, since he works through a pact
       entered into with the devil, is said to work by private contract; for he works by means of the devil,
       who by his natural power can do things outside the order of created nature as known to us, through
       the virtue of a creature unknown to us, and it will be for us a miracle, although not actually so,
       since he cannot work outside of the whole of created nature, and through all the virtues of
       creatures unknown to us. For in this way only God is said to work miracles. As it said: Thou are
       God Who alone workest great marvels. But bad Christians work through the signs of public
       justice, as by invoking the Name of Christ, or by exhibiting certain sacraments. If anyone pleases,
       he can refer to S. Thomas in the first part of the questions, III, art. 4. He can also study the
       conclusions in the Second Part of this work, Chapter VI.
                                                                Page 2 of 3



file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_05b.html (4 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:02:56 PM]
Part I, Question V - P.2



                                               Question V Continued . . . .

                                                           Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                           HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                   All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_05b.html (5 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:02:56 PM]
Part I, Question V - P.3


                                   THE
                           MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                        PART I.
                                               QUESTION V. CONTINUED . . . .

That Witchcraft is not exercised and wrought by Voices and Words under a favouring Influence of the
                                               Stars.

             Neither does witchcraft proceed from words uttered over images by men under favourable
       constellations. For the intellect of a man is of such a nature that its knowledge springs from things,
       and phantasms must be rationally examined. It is not in his nature, simply by though or by the
       instrinsic operation of his intellect, to cause things to happen just be expressing them in words. For
       if there were men who had such power, they would not be of the same nature as we, and could
       only equivocally be called men.
             But it is said that they effect these things by words when the stars of the nativity are
       favourable; from which it would follow that they would be able to act by the power of words only
       under certain conditions, and that they would be powerless without the help of the stars of their
       victim's nativity. But this is clearly false from what has been said before concerning Astromancers,
       casters of Horoscopes and Fortune-tellers.
             Besides, words express the conception of the mind; and the stars cannot influence the
       understanding, neither can the Powers that move them, unless they wish on their own account, and
       apart from the motion of the stars, to enlighten the understanding; and this would only happen in
       regard to good works, for not enlightenment but darkness is given to the understanding for the
       performance of evil works; and such is the function not of good, but of evil spirits. Therefore it is
       clear that if their words are in any way effective, it is not by virtue of any star, but by virtue of
       some Intelligence, which may be naturally good, but cannot be good in respect of will, since it
       always works for evil; and such is the devil, as has been shown above.
             Again, it has been shown above that there are two kinds of images. Those of the Astrologers
       and Mages are ordained not for corruption, but for the obtaining of some private good. But the
       images of witches are quite different, since always they are secretly placed somewhere by the
       command of the devil for the hurt of the creature; and they who walk or sleep over them are
       harmed, as the witches themselves confess. Wherefore whatever they effect is done by means of
       devils, and is not due to the influence of the stars.
             To the arguments. For the first, we must understand the words of S. Augustine, that the cause
       of man's depravity lies in man's will, meaning the cause which produces the effect; which is
       properly said to be the cause. It is not so, however, with the cause which permits the effect, or
       arranges or advises or suggests it, in which sense the devil is said to be the cause of sin and
       depravity; God only permitting it that good may come of evil. As S. Augustine says: The devil
       provides the inner suggestion, and persuades both inwardly and outwardly by more active
       stimulation. But he instructs those who are entirely in his power, as are witches, whom there is no
       need to tempt from within, but only from without, etc.


file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_05c.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:02:57 PM]
Part I, Question V - P.3

             And through this we come to the second argument, that everyone is, by direct understanding,
       the cause of his own wickedness. And concerning this it is to be said that, though it would be
       contrary to the doctrine of free-will to believe that a man may be influenced by direct command, it
       is not to say that he is influenced by suggestion.
             Thirdly, impulses to good or evil can be caused to be suggested by the influence of the stars,
       and the impulse is received as a natural inclination to human virtue or vice. But the works of
       witches are outside the common order of nature, and therefore they cannot be subject to those
       influences.
             The fourth argument is equally clear. For though the stars are a cause of human acts,
       witchcraft is not properly a human act.
             For the fifth argument, that the Powers that move the stars can influence souls. If that is
       understood directly, they do so influence them by enlightening them towards goodness, but not to
       witchcraft, as has been shown above. But if it is understood mediately, then through the medium of
       the stars they exert an indirect and suggestive influence.
             Sixthly, there are two reasons why devils molest men at certain phases of the Moon. First,
       that they may bring disrepute on a creature of God, namely, the Moon, as S. Jerome and S. John
       Chrysostom say. Secondly, because they cannot, as has been said above, operate except through
       the medium of the natural powers. Therefore they study the aptitudes of bodies for receiving an
       impression; and because, as Aristotle says, the brain is the most humid of all the parts of the body,
       therefore it chiefly is subject to the operation of the Moon, which itself has power to incite
       humours. Moreover, the animal forces are perfected in the brain, and therefore the devils disturb a
       man's fancy according to certain phases of the Moon, when the brain is ripe for such influences.
             And there are two reasons why the devils are present as counsellors in certain constellations.
       First, that they may lead men into the error of thinking that there is some divinity in the stars.
       Secondly, because they think that under the influence of some constellations corporeal matter is
       more apt for the deeds that they counsel.
             And as to what S. Augustine says in de Ciuitate Dei, XXXVI: Devils are attracted by various
       kinds of stones, herbs, trees, animals, songs, and instruments of music, not as animals are attracted
       by food, but as spirits by signs, as if these things were exhibited to them as a sign of Divine
       honour, for which they are themselves eager.
             But it is often objected that devils can be hindered by herbs and music from molesting men;
       as it is alleged in the argument from Saul and the music of the harp. And hence an attempt is made
       to argue that some men can work witchcraft through certain herbs and occult causes, without the
       help of devils, buy only of the influence of the stars, which have more direct power over matter
       corporeal for corporeal effects than over the devils for effects of witchcraft.
             Now, though this must be answered more widely, it is to be noted that herbs and music cannot
       by their own natural virtue entirely shut out the molestation which the devil can inflict upon men,
       with the permission of God and the Angels. Yet they can mitigate that molestation; and this can
       even be of so slight a nature that they can entirely remove it. But they would do this, not by acting
       against the devil himself, since he is a separate spirit against whom nothing corporeal can naturally
       act, but by acting against the actual molestation of the devil. For every cause that has limited
       power can produce a more intense effect on a suitable than upon an unsuitable material. See
       Aristotle De Anima. They who act do so upon a predisposed patient. Now the devil is an agent of
       limited power; therefore he can inflict a fiercer affliction on a man disposed to that affliction or to
       that which the devil means to inflict, than upon a man of a contrary disposition. For example, the
       devil can induce a fiercer passion of melancholy in a man disposed to that humour than in a man of

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_05c.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:02:57 PM]
Part I, Question V - P.3

       the contrary disposition.
             Moreover, it is certain that herbs and music can change the disposition of the body, and
       consequently if the emotions. This is evident in the case of herbs, since some incline a man to joy,
       some to sadness, and so with others. It is evident also in the case of music, as Aristotle shows
       (Politics, VIII), where he says that different harmonies can produce different passions in a man.
       Boethius also mentions this in his Music, and the author of the Birth of Knowledge, where he
       speaks of the usefulness of music, and says that it is of value in the cure or alleviation of various
       infirmities. And thus, other things being equal, it may help to weaken the affliction.
             But I do not see how herbs or music can cause a man to be of such a disposition that he can in
       no way be molested by the devil. Even if such a thing were permissible, the devil, moving only in
       local vapour of the spirit, can grievously affect men supernaturally. But herbs and harmonies
       cannot of their own natural virtue cause in man a disposition by which the devil is prevented from
       creating the aforesaid commotion. Nevertheless it sometimes happens that the devil is permitted to
       inflict only so small a vexation on a man that, through some strong contrary disposition, it may be
       totally removed; and then some herbs or harmonies can so dispose a man's body to the contrary
       that the vexation is totally removed. For example, the devil may at times vex a man with the
       affliction of sadness; but so weakly that herbs or harmonies which are capable of causing a
       swelling and uplifting of the spirits, which are contrary emotions to sadness, can totally remove
       that sadness.
             Moreover, S. Augustine, in his Second Book On the Christian Doctrine, condemns amulets
       and certain other things of which he there writes much, attributing their virtue to magic art, since
       thy can have no natural virtue of their own. And this is clear from what he says. To this sort belong
       all amulets and charms which are condemned by the School of Physicians, which condemns very
       clearly their use, in that they have no efficacy of their own natural virtue.
             And as for that concerning I Kings xvi: that Saul, who was vexed by a devil, was alleviated
       when David played his harp before him, and that the devil departed, etc. It must be known that it is
       quite true that by the playing of the harp, and the natural virtue of that harmony, the affliction of
       Saul was to some extent relieved, inasmuch as that music did somewhat calm hs sense through
       hearing; through which calming he was made less prone to that vexation. But the reason why the
       evil spirit departed when David played the harp was because of the might of the Cross, which is
       clearly enough shown by the gloss, where it says: David was learned in music, skilful in the
       different notes and harmonic modulations. He shows the essential unity by playing each day in
       various modes. David repressed the evil spirit by the harp, not because there was so much virtue in
       the harp, but it was made in the sign of a cross, being a cross of wood with the strings stretched
       across it. And even at that time the devils fled from this.
                                                                Page 3 of 3


                                                             Question VI

                                                           Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.


file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_05c.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:02:57 PM]
Part I, Question V - P.3


                           HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                   All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_05c.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:02:57 PM]
Part I, Question VI - P.1


                                    THE
                            MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                              PART I.
                                                            QUESTION VI.

    Concerning Witches who copulate with Devils. Why is it that Women are chiefly addicted to Evil
                                          superstitions?

                            Why it is that Women are chiefly addicted to Evil Superstitions.

             There is also, concerning witches who copulate with devils, much difficulty in considering
       the methods by which such abominations are consummated. On the part of the devil: first, of what
       element the body is made that he assumes; secondly, whether the act is always accompanied by the
       injection of semen received from another; thirdly, as to time and place, whether he commits this
       act more frequently at one time than at another; fourthly, whether the act is invisible to any who
       may be standing by. And on the part of the women, it has to be inquired whether only they who
       were themselves conceived in this filthy manner are often visited by devils; or secondly, whether it
       is those who were offered to devils by midwives at the time of their birth; and thirdly, whether the
       actual venereal delectation of such is of a weaker sort. But we cannot here reply to all these
       questions, both because we are only engaged in a general study, and because in the second part of
       this work they are all singly explained by their operations, as will appear in the fourth chapter,
       where mention is made of each separate method. Therefore, let us now chiefly consider women;
       and first, why this kind of perfidy is found more in so fragile a sex than in men. And our inquiry
       will first be general, as to the general conditions of women; secondly, particular, as to which sort
       of women are found to be given to superstition and witchcraft; and thirdly, specifically with regard
       to midwives, who surpass all others in wickedness.

                                             Why Superstition is chiefly found in Women.
             As for the first question, why a greater number of witches is found in the fragile feminine sex
       than among men; it is indeed a fact that it were idle to contradict, since it is accredited by actual
       experience, apart from the verbal testimony of credibly witnesses. And without in any way
       detracting from a sex in which God has always taken great glory that His might should be spread
       abroad, let us say that various men have assigned various reasons for this fact, which nevertheless
       agree in principle. Wherefore it is good, for the admonition of women, to speak of this matter; and
       it has often been proved by experience that they are eager to hear of it, so long as it is set forth
       with discretion.
             For some learned men propound this reason; that there are three things in nature, the Tongue,
       an Ecclesiastic, and a Woman, which know no moderation in goodness or vice; and when they
       exceed the bounds of their condition they reach the greatest heights and the lowest depths of
       goodness and vice. When they are governed by a good spirit, they are most excellent in virtue; but


file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_06a.html (1 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:02:58 PM]
Part I, Question VI - P.1

       when they are governed by an evil spirit, they indulge the worst possible vices.
             This is clear in the case of the tongue, since by its ministry most of the kingdoms have been
       brought into the faith of Christ; and the Holy Ghost appeared over the Apostles of Christ in
       tongues of fire. Other learned preachers also have had as it were the tongues of dogs, licking
       wounds and sores of the dying Lazarus. As it is said: With the tongues of dogs ye save your souls
       from the enemy.
             For this reason S. Dominic, the leader and father of the Order of Preachers, is represented in
       the figure of a barking to dog with a lighted torch in his mouth, that even to this day he may by his
       barking keep off the heretic wolves from the flock of Christ's sheep.
             It is also a matter of common experience that the tongue of one prudent man can subdue the
       wrangling of a multitude; wherefore not unjustly Solomon sings much in their praise, in Proverbs
       x.: In the lips of him that hath understanding wisdom is found. And again, The tongue of the just is
       as choice silver: the heart of the wicked is little worth. And again, The lips of the righteous feed
       many; but fools die for want of wisdom. For this cause he adds in chapter xvi, The preparations of
       the heart belong to man; but the answer of the tongue is from the Lord.
             But concerning an evil tongue you will find in Ecclesiasticus xxviii: A backbiting tongue hath
       disquieted many, and driven them from nation to nation: strong cities hath it pulled down, and
       overthrown the houses of great men. And by a backbiting tongue it means a third party who rashly
       or spitefully interferes between two contending parties.
             Secondly, concerning Ecclesiastics, that is to say, clerics and religious of either sex, S. John
       Chrysostom speaks on the text, He cast out them that bought and sold from the temple. From the
       priesthood arises everything good, and everything evil. S. Jerome in his epistle to Nepotian says:
       Avoid as you would the plague a trading priest, who has risen from poverty to riches, from a low
       to a high estate. And Blessed Bernard in his 23rd Homily On the Psalms says of clerics: If one
       should arise as an open heretic, let him be cast out and put to silence; if he is a violent enemy, let
       all good men flee from him. But how are we to know which ones to cast out or to flee from? For
       they are confusedly friendly and hostile, peaceable and quarrelsome, neighbourly and utterly
       selfish.
             And in another place: Our bishops are become spearmen, and our pastors shearers. And by
       bishops here is meant those proud Abbots who impose heavy labours on their inferiors, which they
       would not themselves touch with their little finger. And S. Gregory says concerning pastors: No
       one does more harm in the Church than he who, having the name or order of sanctity, lives in sin;
       for no one dares to accuse him of sin, and therefore the sin is widely spread, since the sinner is
       honoured for the sanctity of his order. Blessed Augustine also speaks of monks to Vincent the
       Donatist: I freely confess to your charity before the Lord our God, which is the witness of my soul
       from the time I began to serve God, what great difficulty I have experienced in the fact that it is
       impossible to find either worse of better men than those who grace or disgrace the monasteries.
             Now the wickedness of women is spoken of in Ecclesiasticus xxv: There is no head above the
       head of a serpent: and there is no wrath above the wrath of a woman. I had rather dwell with a lion
       and a dragon than to keep house with a wicked woman. And among much which in that place
       precedes and follows about a wicked woman, he concludes: All wickedness is but little to the
       wickedness of a woman. Wherefore S. John Chrysostom says on the text, It is not good to marry
       (S. Matthew xix): What else is woman but a foe to friendship, an unescapable punishment, a
       necessary evil, a natural temptation, a desirable calamity, a domestic danger, a delectable
       detriment, an evil of nature, painted with fair colours! Therefore if it be a sin to divorce her when


file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_06a.html (2 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:02:58 PM]
Part I, Question VI - P.1

       she ought to be kept, it is indeed a necessary torture; for either we commit adultery by divorcing
       her, or we must endure daily strife. Cicero in his second book of The Rhetorics says: The many
       lusts of men lead them into one sin, but the lust of women leads them into all sins; for the root of
       all woman's vices is avarice. And Seneca says in his Tragedies: A woman either loves or hates;
       there is no third grade. And the tears of woman are a deception, for they may spring from true
       grief, or they may be a snare. When a woman thinks alone, she thinks evil.
             But for good women there is so much praise, that we read that they have brought beatitude to
       men, and have saved nations, lands, and cities; as is clear in the case of Judith, Debbora, and
       Esther. See also I Corinthians vii: If a woman hath a husband that believeth not, let her not leave
       him. For the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the believing wife. And Ecclesiasticus xxvi:
       Blessed is the man who has a virtuous wife, for the number of his days shell be doubled. And
       throughout that chapter much high praise is spoken of the excellence of good women; as also in
       the last chapter of Proverbs concerning a virtuous woman.
             And all this is made clear also in the New Testament concerning women and virgins and
       other holy women who have by faith led nations and kingdoms away from the worship of idols to
       the Christian religion. Anyone who looks at Vincent of Beauvais (in Spe. Histo., XXVI. 9) will
       find marvellous things of the conversion of Hungary by the most Christian Gilia, and of the Franks
       by Clotilda, the wife of Clovis. Wherefore in many vituperations that we read against women, the
       word woman is used to mean the lust of the flesh. As it is said: I have found a woman more bitter
       than death, and good woman subject to carnal lust.
             Other again have propounded other reasons why there are more superstitious women found
       than men. And the first is, that they are more credulous; and since the chief aim of the devil is to
       corrupt faith, therefore he rather attacks them. See Ecclesiasticus xix: He that is quick to believe is
       light-minded, and shall be diminished. The second reason is, that women are naturally more
       impressionable, and more ready to receive the influence of a disembodied spirit; and that when
       they use this quality well they are very good, but when they use it ill they are very evil.
             The third reason is that they have slippery tongues, and are unable to conceal from the
       fellow-women those things which by evil arts they know; and, since they are weak, they find an
       easy and secret manner of vindicating themselves by witchcraft. See Ecclesiasticus as quoted
       above: I had rather dwell with a lion and a dragon than to keep house with a wicked woman. All
       wickedness is but little to the wickedness of a woman. And to this may be added that, as they are
       very impressionable, they act accordingly.
             There are also others who bring forward yet other reasons, of which preachers should be very
       careful how they make use. For it is true that in the Old Testament the Scriptures have much that is
       evil to say about women, and this because of the first temptress, Eve, and her imitators; yet
       afterwards in the New Testament we find a change of name, as from Eva to Ave (as S. Jerome
       says), and the whole sin of Eve taken away by the benediction of Mary. Therefore preachers
       should always say as much praise of them as possible.
             But because in these times this perfidy is more often found in women than in men, as we
       learn by actual experience, if anyone is curious as to the reason, we may add to what has already
       been said the following: that since they are feebler both in mind and body, it is not surprising that
       they should come more under the spell of witchcraft.
             For as regards intellect, or the understanding of spiritual things, they seem to be of a different
       nature from men; a fact which is vouched for by the logic of the authorities, backed by various
       examples from the Scriptures. Terence says: Women are intellectually like children. And


file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_06a.html (3 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:02:58 PM]
Part I, Question VI - P.1

       Lactantius (Institutiones, III): No woman understood philosophy except Temeste. And Proverbs
       xi, as it were describing a woman, says: As a jewel of gold in a swine's snout, so is a fair woman
       which is without discretion.
             But the natural reason is that she is more carnal than a man, as is clear from her many carnal
       abominations. And it should be noted that there was a defect in the formation of the first woman,
       since she was formed from a bent rib, that is, a rib of the breast, which is bent as it were in a
       contrary direction to a man. And since through this defect she is an imperfect animal, she always
       deceives. For Cato says: When a woman weeps she weaves snares. And again: When a woman
       weeps, she labours to deceive a man. And this is shown by Samson's wife, who coaxed him to tell
       her the riddle he had propounded to the Philistines, and told them the answer, and so deceived him.
       And it is clear in the case of the first woman that she had little faith; for when the serpent asked
       why they did not eat of every tree in Paradise, she answered: Of every tree, etc. - lest perchance we
       die. Thereby she showed that she doubted, and had little in the word of God. And all this is
       indicated by the etymology of the word; for Femina comes from Fe and Minus, since she is ever
       weaker to hold and preserve the faith. And this as regards faith is of her very nature; although both
       by grace and nature faith never failed in the Blessed Virgin, even at the time of Christ's Passion,
       when it failed in all men.
             Therefore a wicked woman is by her nature quicker to waver in her faith, and consequently
       quicker to abjure the faith, which is the root of witchcraft.
             And as to her other mental quality, that is, her natural will; when she hates someone whom
       she formerly loved, then she seethes with anger and impatience in her whole soul, just as the tides
       of the sea are always heaving and boiling. Many authorities allude to this cause. Ecclesiasticus
       xxv: There is no wrath above the wrath of a woman. And Seneca (Tragedies, VIII): No might of
       the flames or the swollen winds, no deadly weapon, is so much to be feared as the lust and hatred
       of a woman who has been divorced from the marriage bed.
             This is shown too in the woman who falsely accused Joseph, and caused him to be
       imprisoned because he would not consent to the crime of adultery with her (Genesis xxx). And
       truly the most powerful cause which contributes to the increase of witches is the woeful rivalry
       between married folk and unmarried women and men. This is so even among holy women, so
       what must it be among the others? For you see in Genesis xxi. how impatient and envious Sarah
       was of Hagar when she conceived: How jealous Rachel was of Leah because she had no children
       (Genesis xxx): and Hannah, who was barren, of the fruitful Peninnah (I. Kings i): and how Miriam
       (Numbers xii) murmured and spoke ill of Moses, and was therefore stricken with leprosy: and how
       Martha was jealous of Mary Magdalen, because she was busy and Mary was sitting down (S. Luke
       x). To this point is Ecclesiasticus xxxvii: Neither consult with a woman touching her of whom she
       is jealous. Meaning that it is useless to consult with her, since there is always jealousy, that is,
       envy, in a wicked woman. And if women behave thus to each other, how much more will they do
       so to men.
                                                                Page 1 of 2




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_06a.html (4 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:02:58 PM]
Part I, Question VI - P.1

                                              Question VI Continued . . . .

                                                           Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_06a.html (5 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:02:58 PM]
Notes

           “S. Dominic.” Before the birth of S. Dominic, his mother, Blessed Joanna d’Aza, dreamed that
        she had brought forth a black-and-white dog carrying in his mouth a lighted torch. The dog with
        the torch is accordingly the pictorial attribute of the Saint. Nor must the play upon the name of his
        sons be forgotten - Dominicani, Domini canes, Hounds of the Lord.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0041.html [2002-01-20 12:02:58 PM]
Notes

           “S. John Chrysostom.” Born at Antioch, 347; died at Comana in Pontus, 14 September, 407.
        His fifty-nine homilies “On the Psalms” (iv-xii, xli, xliii-xlix, cviii-cxvii, cxix-cl) are very famous.
        For a full study of these see Baur's “Der ursprüngliche Umfang des Kommentars des hl. Joh.
        Chrysostomus zu den Psalmen” in                          , fasc. I, Rome, 1908.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0042.html [2002-01-20 12:02:58 PM]
Notes

           “S. Matthew.” The ninety Homilies on S. Matthew were written about the year 390.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0043.html [2002-01-20 12:02:59 PM]
Notes

           “Gilia.” Rather Gisela, the devout sister of Duke Henry of Bavaria (the future Emperor S.
        Henry II); in 995 married S. Stephen of Hungary, who succeeded to the throne in 997. She was
        untiring in her efforts to spread the Faith throughout the kingdom. The coronation mantle of
        Hungary, a purple damask cope, embroidered in silk and gold by Queen Gisela, dated 1031, is
        preserved in Budapest.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0044.html [2002-01-20 12:02:59 PM]
Notes

           “Clotilda.” Born probably at Lyons about 474; dies at Tours, 3 June, 545. The feast of S.
        Clotilda is celebrated 3 June. From the sixth century onwards, the marrige of Clovis I, King of the
        Salic Franks, and Clotilda, which took place in 492 or 493, was made the theme of epic narratives
        and many legends. Clotilda soon acquired a great ascendancy over her husband, and she availed
        herself of this influence to win him to the Catholic Faith. For a time her efforts seemed unavailing,
        but Clovis, who in a great battle against the Alemannis saw his men on the point of defeat, invoked
        the God of his wife, promising to become a Christian if only victory should be granted to the
        Franks. The tide instantly turned, and, true to his word, he was baptized at Reims by S. Remigius
        at Christmas, 496. His sister and three thousand of his noblest warriors at the same time
        embraced the Faith. Thus, S. Clotilda was the instrument in the conversion of a mighty people.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0045.html [2002-01-20 12:02:59 PM]
Notes

           “Terence.” “Hecrya,” III, i, 30-32:
          Peuri inter sese quam pro leuibus noxiis iras gerunt!
          Qua propter? quia enim, qui eos gubernaut animus, infirmum gerunt.
          Itidem illæ mulieres sunt ferme, ut pueri, leui sententia.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0046.html [2002-01-20 12:02:59 PM]
Notes

           “Temeste.” “Denique nullas unquam mulieres philosophari docuerunt praeter unam ex omni
        memoria Themisten.” III, xxv. But on this Xistus Betulaeus (ed. 1556) glosses: “Putat fortasse
        Leontii coniugem, as quam Epicurus scripsisse legitur. Quid dicemus de Thermistoclea,
        Pythagorae sorore? quid de aliis pluribus quarum bene longum catalogum Textor recenset?”




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0047.html [2002-01-20 12:02:59 PM]
Notes

           “Seneca.” “Medea,” 579-82.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0048.html [2002-01-20 12:03:00 PM]
Part I, Question VI - P.2


                                    THE
                            MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                        PART I.
                                              QUESTION VI. CONTINUED . . . .

             Valerius Maximus tells how, when Phoroneus, the king of the Greeks, was dying, he said to
       his brother Leontius that there would have been nothing lacking to him of complete happiness if a
       wife had always been lacking to him. And when Leontius asked how a wife could stand in the way
       of happiness, he answered that all married men well knew. And when the philosopher Socrates
       was asked if one should marry a wife, he answered: If you do not, you are lonely, your family dies
       out, and a stranger inherits; if you do, you suffer perpetual anxiety, querelous complaints,
       reproaches concerning the marriage portion, the heavy displeasure of your relations, the
       garrulousness of a mother-in-law, cuckoldom, and no certain arrival of an heir. This he said as one
       who knew. For S. Jerome in his Contra Iouinianum says: This Socrates had two wives, whom he
       endured with much patience, but could not be rid of their contumelies and clamorous
       vituperations. So one day when they were complaining against him, he went out of the house to
       escape their plaguing, and sat down before the house; and the women then threw filthy water over
       him. But the philosopher was not disturbed by this, saying, “I knew the rain would come after the
       thunder.”
            There is also a story of a man whose wife was drowned in a river, who, when he was
       searching for the body to take it out of the water, walked up the stream. And when he was asked
       why, since heavy bodies do not rise but fall, he was searching against the current of the river, he
       answered: “When that woman was alive she always, both in word and deed, went contrary to my
       commands; therefore I am searching in the contrary direction in case even now she is dead she
       may preserve her contrary disposition.”
            And indeed, just as through the first defect in their intelligence that are more prone to abjure
       the faith; so through their second defect of inordinate affections and passions they search for,
       brood over, and inflict various vengeances, either by witchcraft, or by some other means.
       Wherefore it is no wonder that so great a number of witches exist in this sex.
            Women also have weak memories; and it is a natural vice in them not to be disciplined, but to
       follow their own impulses without any sense of what is due; this is her whole study, and all that
       she keeps in her memory. So Theophrastus says: If you hand over the whole management of the
       house to her, but reserve some minute detail to your own judgement, she will think that you are
       displaying a great want of faith in her, and will stir up a strife; and unless you quickly take
       counsel, she will prepare poison for you, and consult seers and soothsayers; and will become a
       witch.
            But as to domination by women, hear what Cicero says in the Paradoxes. Can he be called a
       free man whose wife governs him, imposes laws on him, orders him, and forbids him to do what
       he wishes, so that he cannot and dare not deny her anything that she asks? I should call him not
       only a slave, but the vilest of slaves, even if he comes from the noblest family. And Seneca, in the
       character of the raging Medea, says: Why do you cease to follow your happy impulse; how great is


file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_06b.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:00 PM]
Part I, Question VI - P.2

       that part of vengeance in which you rejoice? Where he adduces many proofs that a woman will not
       be governed, but will follow her own impulse even to her own destruction. In the same way we
       read of many woman who have killed themselves either for love or sorrow because they were
       unable to work their vengeance.
             S. Jerome, writing of Daniel, tells a story of Laodice, wife of Antiochus king of Syria; how,
       being jealous lest he should love his other wife, Berenice, more than her, she first caused Berenice
       and her daughter by Antiochus to be slain, and then poisoned herself. And why? Because she
       would not be governed, and would follow her own impulse. Therefore, S. John Chrysostom says
       not without reason: O evil worse than all evil, a wicked woman, whether she be poor or rich. For if
       she be the wife of a rich man, she does not cease night and day to excite her husband with hot
       words, to use evil blandishments and violent importunations. And if she have a poor husband she
       does not cease to stir him also to anger and strife. And if she be a widow, she takes it upon herself
       everywhere to look down on everybody, and is inflamed to all boldness by the spirit of pride.
             If we inquire, we find that nearly all the kingdoms of the world have been overthrown by
       women. Troy, which was a prosperous kingdom, was, for the rape of one woman, Helen,
       destroyed, and many thousands of Greeks slain. The kingdom of the Jews suffered much
       misfortune and destruction through the accursed Jezebel, and her daughter Athaliah, queen of
       Judah, who caused her son's sons to be killed, that on their death she might reign herself; yet each
       of them was slain. The kingdom of the Romans endured much evil through Cleopatra, Queen of
       Egypt, that worst of women. And so with others. Therefore it is no wonder if the world now
       suffers through the malice of women.
             And now let us examine the carnal desires of the body itself, whence has arise unconscionable
       harm to human life. Justly we may say with Cato of Utica: If the world could be rid of women, we
       should not be without God in our intercourse. For truly, without the wickedness of women, to say
       nothing of witchcraft, the world would still remain proof against innumerable dangers. Hear what
       Valerius said to Rufinus: You do not know that woman is the Chimaera, but it is good that you
       should know it; for that monster was of three forms; its face was that of a radiant and noble lion, it
       had the filthy belly of a goat, and it was armed with the virulent tail of a viper. And he means that
       a woman is beautiful to look upon, contaminating to the touch, and deadly to keep.
             Let us consider another property of hers, the voice. For as she is a liar by nature, so in her
       speech she stings while she delights us. Wherefore her voice is like the song of the Sirens, who
       with their sweet melody entice the passers-by and kill them. For they kill them by emptying their
       purses, consuming their strength, and causing them to forsake God. Again Valerius says to
       Rufinus: When she speaks it is a delight which flavours the sin; the flower of love is a rose,
       because under its blossom there are hidden many thorns. See Proverbs v, 3-4: Her mouth is
       smoother than oil; that is, her speech is afterwards as bitter as absinthium. [Her throat is smoother
       than oil. But her end is as bitter as wormwood.]
            Let us consider also her gait, posture, and habit, in which is vanity of vanities. There is no
       man in the world who studies so hard to please the good God as even an ordinary woman studies
       by her vanities to please men. An example of this is to be found in the life of Pelagia, a worldly
       woman who was wont to go about Antioch tired and adorned most extravagantly. A holy father,
       named Nonnus, saw her and began to weep, saying to his companions, that never in all his life had
       he used such diligence to please God; and much more he added to this effect, which is preserved in
       his orations.
             It is this which is lamented in Ecclesiastes vii, and which the Church even now laments on


file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_06b.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:00 PM]
Part I, Question VI - P.2

       account of the great multitude of witches. And I have found a woman more bitter than death, who
       is the hunter's snare, and her heart is a net, and her hands are bands. He that pleaseth God shall
       escape from her; but he that is a sinner shall be caught by her. More bitter than death, that is, than
       the devil: Apocalypse vi, 8, His name was Death. For though the devil tempted Eve to sin, yet Eve
       seduced Adam. And as the sin of Eve would not have brought death to our soul and body unless
       the sin had afterwards passed on to Adam, to which he was tempted by Eve, not by the devil,
       therefore she is more bitter than death.
             More bitter than death, again, because that is natural and destroys only the body; but the sin
       which arose from woman destroys the soul by depriving it of grace, and delivers the body up to the
       punishment of sin.
             More bitter than death, again, because bodily death is an open and terrible enemy, but woman
       is a wheedling and secret enemy.
             And that she is more perilous than a snare does not speak of the snare of hunters, but of
       devils. For men are caught not only trough their carnal desires, when they see and hear women: for
       S. Bernard says: Their face is a burning wind, and their voice the hissing of serpents: but they also
       cast wicked spells on countless men and animals. And when it is said that her heart is a net, it
       speaks of the inscrutable malice which reigns in their hearts. And her hands are as bands for
       binding; for when they place their hands on a creature to bewitch it, then with the help of the devil,
       they perform their design.
             To conclude. All witchcraft comes from carnal lust, which is in women insatiable. See
       Proverbs xxx: There are three things that are never satisfied, yea, a fourth thing which says not, It
       is enough; that is, the mouth of the womb. Wherefore for the sake of fulfilling their lusts they
       consort even with devils. More such reasons could be brought forward, but to the understanding it
       is sufficiently clear that it is no matter for wonder that there are more women than men found
       infected with the heresy of witchcraft. And in consequence of this, it is better called the heresy of
       witches than of wizards, since the name is taken from the more powerful party. And blessed be the
       Highest Who has so far preserved the male sex from so great a crime: for since He was willing to
       be born and to suffer for us, therefore He has granted to men the privilege.

                    What sort of Women are found to be above all Others Superstitious and Witches.

            As to our second inquiry, what sort of women more than others are found to be superstitious
       and infected with witchcraft; it must be said, as was shown in the preceding inquiry, that three
       general vices appear to have special dominion over wicked women, namely, infidelity, ambition,
       and lust. Therefore they are more than others inclined towards witchcraft, who more than others
       are given to these vices. Again, since of these vices the last chiefly predominates, women being
       insatiable, etc., it follows that those among ambitious women are more deeply infected who are
       more hot to satisfy their filthy lusts; and such are adulteresses, fornicatresses, and the concubines
       of the Great.
            Now there are, as it is said in the Papal Bull, seven methods by which they infect with
       witchcraft the venereal act and the conception of the womb: First, by inclining the minds of men to
       inordinate passion; second, by obstructing their generative force; third, by removing the members
       accomodated to that act; fourth, by changing men into beasts by their magic art; fifth, by
       destroying the generative force in women; sixth, by procuring abortion; seventh, by offering
       children to devils, besides other animals and fruits of the earth with which they work much harm.
       And all these will be considered later; but for present let us give our minds to the injuries towards

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_06b.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:00 PM]
Part I, Question VI - P.2

       men.
              And first concerning those who are bewitched into an inordinate love or hatred, this is a
       matter of a sort that it is difficult to discuss before the general intelligence. Yet it must be granted
       that it is a fact. For S. Thomas (IV, 34), treating of obstructions caused by witches, shows that God
       allows the devil greater power against men's venereal acts than against their other actions; and
       gives this reason, that this is likely to be so, since those women are chiefly apt to be witches who
       are most disposed to such acts.
              For he says that, since the first corruption of sin by which man became the slave of the devil
       came to us through the act of generation, therefore greater power is allowed by God to the devil in
       this act than in all others. Also the power of witches is more apparent in serpents, as it is said, than
       in other animals, because through the means of a serpent the devil tempted woman. For this reason
       also, as is shown afterwards, although matrimony is a work of God, as being instituted by Him, yet
       it is sometimes wrecked by the work of the devil: not indeed through main force, since then he
       might be though stronger than God, but with the permission of God, by causing some temporary or
       permanent impediment in the conjugal act.
              And touching this we may say what is known by experience; that these women satisfy their
       filthy lists not only in themselves, but even in the mighty ones of the age, of whatever state and
       condition; causing by all sorts of witchcraft the death of their souls through the excessive
       infatuation of carnal love, in such a way that for no shame or persuasion can they desist from such
       acts. And through such men, since witches will not permit any harm to come to them either from
       themselves or from others once they have them in their power, there arises the great danger of the
       time, namely, the extermination of the Faith. And in this way do witches every day increase.
              And would that this were not true according to experience. But indeed such hatred is aroused
       by witchcraft between those joined in the sacrament of matrimony, and such freezing up of the
       generative forces, that men are unable to perform the necessary action for begetting offspring. But
       since love and hate exist in the soul, which even the devil cannot enter, lest these things should
       seem incredibly to anyone, they must be inquired into; and by meeting argument with argument
       the matter will be made clear.
                                                                Page 2 of 2


                                                            Question VII

                                                           Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_06b.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:00 PM]
Notes

           “Contra Iouinianum.” This treatise was written 392-93.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0049.html [2002-01-20 12:03:00 PM]
Notes

          “Medea.” V, 895-6:
          Quid, anime, cessas sequere felicem impetum?
          Pars ultonis ista, qua gaudes, quota est?




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0050.html [2002-01-20 12:03:01 PM]
Notes

           “Pelagia.” “Pelagia meretix” or “Pelagia mima,” a beautiful actress who led the life of a
        prostitute at Antioch. She was converted by the holy bishop Nonnus, and disguised as a man went
        on a pilgrimage to Jerusalem, where for many years she led the life of extremist mortification and
        penance in a grotto on the Mount of Olives. This “ienheureuse pécheresse” attained to such
        heights of sanctity that she was canonized, and in the East, where her cult was long very popular,
        her festival is kept on 8 October, which is also the day of her commemoration in the Roman
        Martyrology.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0051.html [2002-01-20 12:03:01 PM]
Part I, Question VII - P.1


                                     THE
                             MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                               PART I.
                                                            QUESTION VII.

                             Whether Witches can Sway the Minds of Men to Love or Hatred.

             It is asked whether devils, through the medium of witches, can change or incite the minds of
       men to inordinate love or hatred; and it is argued that, following the previous conclusions, they
       cannot do so. For there are three things in man: will, understanding, and body. The first is ruled by
       God (for, The heart of the king is in the hand of the Lord); the second is enlightened by an Angel;
       and the body is governed by the motions of the stars. And as the devils cannot effect changes in
       the body, even less have they power to incite love or hatred in the soul. The consequence is clear;
       that though they have more power over things corporeal than over things spiritual, they cannot
       change even the body, as has been often proved. For they cannot induce any substantial or
       accidental form, except is as it were their artificer. In this connexion is quoted what has been said
       before; that whoever believes that any creature can be changed for the better or worse or
       transformed into another kind or likeness, except by the Creator of all things, is worse than a pagan
       and a heretic.
             Besides, everything that acts with design knows its own effect. If, therefore, the devil could
       change the minds of men to hatred or love, he would also be able to see the inner thoughts of the
       heart; but this is contrary to what is said in the Book of Ecclesiastic Dogma: The devil cannot see
       our inner thoughts. And again in the same place: Not all our evil thoughts are from the devil, but
       sometimes they arise from our own choice.
             Besides, love and hatred are a matter of the will, which is rooted in the soul; therefore they
       cannot by any cunning be caused by the devil. The conclusion holds that He alone (as S. Augustine
       says) is able to enter into the soul, Who created it.
             Besides, it is not valid to argue that because he can influence the inner emotions, therefore he
       can govern the will. For the emotions are stronger than physical strength; and the devil can effect
       nothing in a physical way, such as the formation of flesh and blood; therefore he can effect nothing
       through the emotions.
             But against this. The devil is said to tempt men not only visibly but also invisibly; but this
       would not be true unless he were able to exert some influence over the inner mind. Besides, S.
       John Damascene says: All evil and all filthiness is devised by the devil. And Dionysius, de Divin.
       Nom. IV: The multitude of devils is the cause of all evil, etc.
             Answer. First, one sort of cause is to be distinguished from another: secondly, we shall show
       how the devil can affect the inner powers of the mind, that is the emotions; and thirdly, we shall
       draw the fit conclusion. And as to the first, it is to be considered that the cause of anything can be
       understood in two ways; either as direct, or as indirect. For when something cause a disposition to
       some effect, it is said to be an occasional and indirect cause of that effect. In this way it may be
       said that he who chops wood is the cause of the actual fire. And similarly we may say that the


file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_07a.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:02 PM]
Part I, Question VII - P.1

       devil is the cause of all our sins; for he incited the first man to sin, from whose sin it has been
       handed down to the whole human race to have an inclination towards sin. And in this way are to
       be understood the words of S. John Damascene and Dionysius.
             But a direct cause is one that directly causes an effect; and in this sense the devil is not the
       cause of all sin. For all sins are not committed at the instigation of the devil, but some are of our
       own choosing. For Origen says: Even if the devil were not, men would still lust after food and
       venery and such things. And from these inordinate lusts much may result, unless such appetites be
       reasonably restrained. But to restrain such ungoverned desire is the part of man's free-will, over
       which even the devil has no power.
             And because this distinction is not sufficient to explain how the devil at times produces a
       frantic infatuation of love, it is further to be noted that though he cannot cause that inordinate love
       by directly compelling a man's will, yet he can do so by means of persuasion. And this again in
       two ways, either visibly or invisibly. Visibly, when he appears to witches in the form of a man,
       and speaks to them materially, persuading them to sin. So he tempted our first parents in Paradise
       in the form of a serpent; and so he tempted Christ in the wilderness, appearing to Him in visible
       form.
             But it is not to be thought that this is the only way he influences a man; for in that case no sin
       would proceed from the devil's instruction, except such as were suggested by him in visible form.
       Therefore it must be said that even invisibly he instigates man to sin. And this he does in two
       ways, either by persuasion or by disposition. By persuasion, he presents something to the
       understanding as being a good thing. And this he can do in three ways; for he presents it either to
       the intellect, or to the inner perceptions, or to the outer. And as for the intellect; the human intellect
       can be helped by a good Angel to understand a thing by means of enlightenment, as Dionysius
       says; and to understand a thing, according to Aristotle, is to suffer something: therefore the devil
       can impress some form upon the intellect, by which the act of understanding is called forth.
             And it may be argued that the devil can do this by his natural power, which is not, as had
       been shown, diminished. It is to be said, however, that he cannot do this by means of
       enlightenment, but by persuasion. For the intellect of man is of that condition that, the more it is
       enlightened, the more it knows the truth, and the more it can defend itself from deception. And
       because the devil intends his deception to be permanent, therefore no persuasion that he uses can
       be called enlightenment: although it may be called revelation, in that when he invisibly uses
       persuasion, by means of some impression he plants something on the inner or outer sense. And by
       this the reasoning intellect is persuaded to perform some action.
             But as to how he is enabled to create an impression on the inner sense, it is to be noted that
       the bodily nature is naturally born to be moved locally by the spiritual; which is clear from the
       case of our own bodies, which are moved by souls; and the same is the case with the stars. But it is
       not by nature adapted to be directly subject to influences, by which we mean outside influences,
       not those with which it is informed. Wherefore the concurrence of some bodily agent is necessary,
       as is proved in the 7th book of the Metaphysics. Corporeal matter naturally obeys a good or bad
       angel as to the local motion; and it is due to this that devils can through motion collect semen, and
       employ it for the production of wonderful results. This was how it happened that Pharao's
       magicians produced serpents and actual animals, when corresponding active and passive agents
       were brought together. Therefore there is nothing to prevent the devils from effecting anything that
       appertains to the local motion of corporeal matter, unless God prevent it.
             And now let us examine how the devil can through local motion excite the fancy and inner
       sensory perceptions of a man by apparitions and impulsive actions. It is to be noted that Aristotle

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_07a.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:02 PM]
Part I, Question VII - P.1

       (De Somno et Uigilia) assigns the cause of apparitions in dreams through local motion to the fact
       that, when an animal sleeps the blood flows to the inmost seat of the senses, from which descend
       motions or impressions which remain from past impressions preserved in the mind or inner
       perception; and these are Fancy or Imagination, which are the same thing according to S. Thomas,
       as will be shown.
             For fancy or imagination is as it were the treasury of ideas received through the senses. And
       through this it happens that devils stir up the inner perceptions, that is the power of conserving
       images, that they appear to be a new impression at that moment received from exterior things.
             It is true that all do not agree to this; but if anyone wishes to occupy himself with this
       question, he must consider the number and the office of the inner perceptions. According to
       Avicenna, in his book On the Mind, these are five: namely, Common Sense, Fancy, Imagination,
       Thought, and Memory. But S. Thomas, in the First Part of Question 79, says that they are only
       four, since Fancy and Imagination are the same thing. For fear of prolixity I omit much more that
       has variously been said on this subject.
             Only this must be said; that fancy is the treasury of ideas, but memory appears to be
       something different. For fancy is the treasury or repository of ideas received through the senses;
       but memory is the treasury of instincts, which are not received through the senses. For when a man
       sees a wolf, he runs away, not because of its ugly colour or appearance, which are ideas received
       through the outer senses and conserved in his fancy; but he runs away because the wolf is his
       natural enemy. And this he knows through some instinct or fear, which is apart from thought,
       which recognized the wolf as hostile, but a dog as friendly. But the repository of those instincts is
       memory. And reception and retention are two different things in animal nature; for those who are
       of a humid disposition receive readily, but retain badly; and the contrary is the case of those with a
       dry humour.
             To return to the question. The apparitions that come in dreams to sleepers proceed from the
       ideas retained in the repository of their mind, through a natural local motion caused by the flow of
       blood to the first and inmost seat of their faculties of perception; and we speak of an instrinsic
       local motion in the head and the cells of the brain.
             And this can also happen through a similar local motion created by devils. Also such things
       happen not only to the sleeping, but even to those who are awake. For in these also the devils can
       stir up and excite the inner perceptions and humours, so that ideas retained in the repositories of
       their minds are drawn out and made apparent to the faculties of fancy and imagination, so that
       such men imagine these things to be true. And this is called interior temptation.
             And it is no wonder that the devil can do this by his own natural power; since any man by
       himself, being awake and having the use of his reason, can voluntarily draw from his repositories
       the images he has retained in them; in such a way that he can summon to himself the images of
       whatsoever things he pleases. And this being granted, it is easy to understand the matter of
       excessive infatuation in love.
             Now there are two ways in which devils can, as has been said, raise up this kind of images.
       Sometimes they work without enchaining the human reason, as has been said in the matter of
       temptation, and the example of voluntary imagination. But sometimes the use of reason is entirely
       chained up; and this may be exemplified by certain naturally defective persons, and by madmen
       and drunkards. Therefore it is no wonder that devils can, with God's permission, chain up the
       reason; and such men are called delirious, because their senses have been snatched away by the
       devil. And this they do in two ways, either with or without the help of witches. For Aristotle, in the
       work we have quoted, says that anyone who lives in passion is moved by only a little thing, as a

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_07a.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:02 PM]
Part I, Question VII - P.1

       lover by the remotest likeness of his love, and similarly with one who feels hatred. Therefore
       devils, who have learned from men's acts to which passions they are chiefly subject, incite them to
       this sort of inordinate love or hatred, impressing their purpose on men's imagination the more
       strongly and effectively, as they can do so the more easily. And this is the more easy for a lover to
       summon up the image of his love from his memory, and retain it pleasurably in his thoughts.
             But they work by witchcraft when they do these things through and at the instance of witches,
       by reason of a pact entered into with them. But it is not possible to treat of such matters in detail,
       on account of the great number of instances both among the clergy and among the laity. For how
       many adulterers have put away the most beautiful wives to lust after the vilest of women!
             We know of an old woman who, according to the common account of the brothers in that
       monastery even up to this day, in this manner not only bewitched three successive Abbots, but
       even killed them, and in the same way drove the fourth out of his mind. For she herself publicly
       confessed it, and does not fear to say: I did so and I do so, and they are not able to keep from
       loving me because they have eaten so much of my dung - measuring off a certain length on her
       arm. I confess, moreover, that since we had no case to prosecute her or bring her to trial, she
       survives to this day.
             It will be remembered that it was said that the devil invisibly lures a man to sin, not only by
       means of persuasion, as has been said, but also by the means of disposition. Although this is not
       very pertinent, yet be it said that by a similar admonition of the disposition and humours of men,
       he renders some more disposed to anger, or concupiscence, or other passions. For it is manifest
       that a man who has a body so disposed is more prone to concupiscence and anger and such
       passions; and when they are aroused, he is more apt to surrender to them. But because it is difficult
       to quote precedents, therefore an easier method must be found of declaring them for the
       admonition of the people. And in the Second Part of this book we treat of the remedies by which
       men so bewitched can be set free.
                                                                Page 1 of 2


                                              Question VII Continued . . . .

                                                           Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                         HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                 All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_07a.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:02 PM]
Part I, Question VII - P.2


                                     THE
                             MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                       PART I.
                                             QUESTION VII. CONTINUED . . . .

                             The Method of Preaching to the People about Infatuate Love.

             Concerning what has been said above, a preacher asks this question: Is it a Catholic view to
       maintain that witches can infect the minds of men with an inordinate love of strange women, and
       so inflame their hearts that by no shame or punishment, by no words or actions can they be forced
       to desist from such love; and that similarly they can stir up such hatred between married couples
       that they are unable in any way to perform the procreant functions of marriage; so that, indeed, in
       the untimely silence of night, they cover great distances in search of mistresses and irregular
       lovers?
             As to this matter, he may, if he wishes, find some arguments in the preceding question.
       Otherwise, it need only be said that there are difficulties in those questions on account of love and
       hate. For these passions invade the will, which is in its own act always free, and not to be coerced
       by and creature except God, Who can govern it. From which it is clear that neither the devil nor a
       witch working by his power can force a man's will to love or to hate. Again, since the will, like the
       understanding, exists subjectively in the soul, and He alone can enter into the soul Who created it,
       therefore this question presents many difficulties in the matter of unravelling the truth of it.
             But notwithstanding this, we must speak first of infatuation and hatred, and secondly about
       the bewitching of the generative power. And as to the first, although the devil cannot directly
       operate upon the understanding and will of man, yet, according to all the learned Theologians in
       the 2nd Book of Sentences, on the subject of the power of the devil, he can act upon the body, or
       upon the faculties belonging to or allied to the body, whether they be the inner or outer
       perceptions. This is authoritatively and reasonably proved in the preceding question, if one cares to
       look; but if not, there is the authority of Job ii: The Lord said unto Satan, Behold, he is in thine
       hand. That is, Job is in his power. But this was only in regard to the body, for He would not give
       his soul into his power. Wherefore He said: Only save thou his life; that is, keep it unharmed. And
       that power He gave him over his body, He gave also over all the faculties allied to the body, which
       are the four or five outer and inner perceptions, namely Common Sense, Fancy or Imagination,
       Thought, and Memory.
             If no other instance can be given, let us take an example from pigs and sheep. For pigs know
       by instinct their way home. And by natural instinct sheep distinguish a wolf from a dog, knowing
       one to be the enemy and the other the friend of their nature.
             Consequently, since all our reasoned knowledge comes from the senses (for Aristotle in the
       2nd book On the Mind says that an intelligent man must take notice of phantasms), therefore the
       devil can affect the inner fancy, and darken the understanding. And this is not to act immediately
       upon the mind, but through the medium of phantasms. Because, also, nothing is loved until it is
       known.


file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_07b.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:02 PM]
Part I, Question VII - P.2

             As many examples as are needed could be taken from gold, which the miser loves because he
       knows its power, etc. Therefore when the understanding is darkened, the will also is darkened in
       its affectations. Moreover, the devil can effect this either with or without the help of a witch; and
       such things can even happen through mere want of foresight. But we shall give examples of each
       kind. For, as it is said in S. James i: Every man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own lust,
       and enticed. Then when lust hath conceived, it bringeth forth sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth
       death. Again, when Schechem saw Dinah going out to see the daughters of the land, he loved her,
       and seized her, and lay with her, and his soul clave unto her (Genesis xxxiv). And according to the
       gloss: When the infirm mind forsakes its own business, and takes heed, like Dinah, of that of other
       people, it is led astray by habit, and becomes one with the sinners.
             Secondly, that this lust can arise apart from witchcraft, and simply through the temptation of
       the devil, is shown as follows. For we read in II. Samuel xiii that Ammon desperately loved his
       own sister Tamar, and yearned greatly for her, so that he grew ill for love for her. But no one
       would fall into so great and foul a crime unless he were totally corrupt, and grievously tempted by
       the devil. Wherefore the gloss says: This is a warning to us, and was permitted by God that we
       should always be on guard lest vice should get the mastery over us, and the prince of sin, who
       promises a false peace to those who are in danger, finding us ready should slay us unaware.
             Mention is made of this sort of passion in the Book of the Holy Fathers, where it says that,
       however far they withdrew themselves from all carnal lusts, yet they were sometimes tempted by
       the love of women more than could possibly be believed. Wherefore in II. Corinthians xii the
       Apostle says: There was given to me a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me. On
       which the gloss says: It was given to me to be tempted by lust. But he who is tempted and does not
       yield is no sinner, but it is a matter for the exercise of virtue. And by temptation is understood that
       of the devil, not that of the flesh, which is always venial in a little sin. The preacher could find
       many examples if he pleased.
             The third point, that infatuate love proceeds from the evil works of the devil, has been
       discussed above; and we speak of this temptation.
             It may be asked how it is possible to tell whether such inordinate love proceeds not from the
       devil but only from a witch. And the answer is that there are many ways. First, if the man tempted
       has a beautiful and honest wife, or the converse in the case of a woman, etc. Secondly, if the
       judgement of the reason is so chained up that by no blows or words or deeds, or even by shame,
       can he be made to desist from that lust. And thirdly, in especial, when he cannot contain himself,
       but that he is at times unexpectedly, and in spite of the roughness of the journey, forced to be
       carried through great distances (as anyone can learn from the confessions of such men), both by
       day and by night. For as S. John Chrysostom says on Matthew xx concerning the ass upon which
       Christ rode: When the devil possesses the will of a man with sin, he carries him at his will where
       he pleases. Giving the example of a ship in the sea without a rudder, which the winds carry about
       at their pleasure; and of a man firmly sitting a horse; and a King having dominion over a tyrant.
       And fourthly, it is shown by the fact that they are sometimes suddenly and unexpectedly carried
       away, and at times transformed, so that nothing can prevent it. It is shown also by the hideousness
       of their very appearance.
             And before we proceed to the further question of witches, touching the powers of generation,
       which follows, we must first resolve the arguments.

                                            Here Follow the Resolutions of the Arguments.


file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_07b.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:02 PM]
Part I, Question VII - P.2

             But for the answer to the arguments: for the first, that the will of man is ruled by God, just as
       his understanding is by a good Angel, the solution is clear. For the intellect is enlightened by a
       good Angel only to the knowledge of the truth, from which proceeds the love of that which is
       good, for the True and the Actual are the same thing. So also the intellect can be darkened by a bad
       angel in the knowledge of what appear to be true; and this through a confusion of the ideas and
       images received and stored by the perceptions, from which comes an inordinate love of the
       apparently good, such as bodily delectation, which such men seek after.
             As to the second argument, that the devil cannot effect physical changes in the body; this is in
       part true, and in part not, and this is with reference to three sorts of mutation. For the devil cannot
       change the body in such a way that its whole shape and appearance is altered (which is rather to be
       called a new production than a change) without the help of some agent, or with the permission of
       God. But if we speak of a change in quality, as in the matter of sickness and health, as has been
       shown before, he can inflict upon the body various diseases, even to taking away the reason, and
       so can cause inordinate hatred and love.
             And a third kind of mutation can be added, which is when a good or bad angel enters into the
       body, in the same way that we say that God alone is able to enter into the soul, that is, the essence
       of life. But when we speak of an angel, especially a bad angel, entering the body, as in the case of
       an obsession, he does not enter beyond the limits of the essence of the body; for in this way only
       God the Creator can enter, Who gave it to be as it were the intrinsic operation of life. But the devil
       is said to enter the body when he effects something about the body: for when he works, there he is,
       as S. John Damascene says. And then he works within the bounds of corporeal matter, but not
       within the very essence of the body.
             For this it appears that the body has two properties, matter and spirit. And this is like the
       distinction between the apparent and the real. Therefore when devils enter the body, they enter the
       power belonging to the bodily organs, and can so create impressions on those powers. And so it
       happens that through such operations and impressions a phantasm is projected before the
       understanding, such as the seeing of colours, as it is said in the 3rd book de Anima. And so this
       impression penetrates also to the will. For the will takes its conception of what is good from the
       intellect, according as the intellect accepts something as good either in truth or in appearance.
             As for the third argument: a knowledge of the thoughts of the heart may come about in two
       ways, either from seeing their efforts or by reading them actually in the intellect. In the first way
       they can be known not only by an angel, but even by man, although it will be shown that an angel
       has more skill in this matter. For sometimes the thoughts are made evident, not only by some
       external action, but even by a change in the countenance. And doctors also can discern some
       affections of the mind through the pulse. Wherefore S. Augustine says (de Diuin. Daem.) that
       sometimes it is very easy to tell a man's disposition, not only from his words, but from his very
       thoughts, which are signs of the soul expressed in the body; although in his book of Retractions he
       says that no definite rule can be laid down how this is done; and I think that he is reluctant to admit
       that the devil can know the inner thoughts of the heart.
             From another point of view, the thoughts of the intellect and the affectations of the will can
       be known only by God. For the will of a rational creature is subject only to God, and He alone can
       work in it Who is its first cause and ultimate end. Therefore that which is in the will, or depends
       only on the will, is known only to God. Moreover, it is manifest what depends only on the will, if
       one considers things by their resultant actions. For when a man has the quality of knowledge, and
       the understanding that comes from it, he uses it when he wills.
             It is proved, then, from what has been said, that a spirit cannot enter the soul, therefore he

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_07b.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:02 PM]
Part I, Question VII - P.2

       cannot, naturally, see what is in the mind, especially what is in the inner depths of the soul.
       Wherefore, when it is argued that the devil cannot see the thoughts of the heart, and therefore
       cannot move the hearts of men to love or hatred, it is answered that he does learn men's thoughts
       through their visible effects, and is more skilful in this matter than man; and so by subtle ways he
       can move men to love and hatred, by creating phantasms and darkening the intellect.
             And this must be said by way of comfort to relieve the apprehensions of the virtuous: that
       when the sensible exterior and bodily change which accompanied men's thoughts is so vague and
       indeterminate that the devil cannot by it arrive at any certain knowledge of the thoughts, especially
       when the virtuous at times take a little leisure from study and good works, he molests them then
       chiefly in dreams; as is known by experience. But when the physical effect of thought is strong
       and determinate, the devil can know by a man's appearance whether his thoughts are turned
       towards envy or luxury. But we find that it must be left an open question whether he can by this
       means have certain knowledge in respect of all circumstances, as such and such; although it is true
       that he can know such circumstances from their subsequent results.
             And fourthly: although to enter the soul belongs only to God, yet it is possible for a good or
       bad angel to enter the body and the faculties allied to the body, in the manner which has been
       shown above. And in this way hatred and love can be aroused in such a man. For the other
       argument, that the powers of the spirit are greater than the physical powers, which themselves
       cannot be changed by the devil, in so far as they can be hastened or retarded in the flesh and bone.
       But he does this, not for the sake of impeding or stimulating the inner or outer perceptions, but for
       his own gain; since he derives his chief benefit by the deception of the senses and the delusion of
       the intellect.
                                                                Page 2 of 2


                                                            Question VIII

                                                           Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                         HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                 All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_07b.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:02 PM]
Part I, Question VIII


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                              PART I.
                                                           QUESTION VIII.

            Whether Witches can hebetate the Powers of Generation or obstruct the Venereal Act.

              Now the fact that adulterous drabs and whores are chiefly given to witchcraft is substantiated
       by the spells which are cast by witches upon the act of generation. And to make the truth more
       clear, we will consider the arguments of those who are in disagreement with us on this matter. And
       first it is argued that such a bewitching is not possible, because if it were it would apply equally to
       those who are married; and if this were conceded, then, since matrimony is God's work and
       witchcraft is the devil's, the devil's work would be stronger than God's. But if it is allowed that it
       can only affect fornicators and the unmarried, this involves a return to the opinion that witchcraft
       does not really exist, but only in men's imagination; and this was refuted in the First Question. Or
       else some reason will be found why it should affect the unmarried and not the married; and the
       only possible reason is that matrimony is God's work. And since, according to the Theologians,
       this reason is not valid, there still remains the argument that it would make the devil's work
       stronger than God's; and since it would be unseemly to make such an assertion, it is also unseemly
       to maintain that the venereal act can be obstructed by witchcraft.
              Again, the devil cannot obstruct the other natural actions, such as eating, walking and
       standing, as is apparent from the fact that, if he could, he could destroy the whole world.
              Besides, since the venereal act is common to all women, if it were obstructed it would be so
       with reference to all women; but this is not so, and therefore the first argument is good. For the
       facts prove that it is not so; for when a man says that he has been bewitched, he is still quite
       capable as regards other women, though not with her with whom he is unable to copulate; and the
       reason for this is that he does not wish to, and therefore cannot effect anything in the matter.
              On the contrary and true side is the chapter in the Decretals (If by sortilege, etc.): as is also
       the opinion of all the Theologians and Canonists, where they treat of the obstruction to marriage
       caused by witchcraft.
              There is also another reason: that since the devil is more powerful than man, and a man can
       obstruct the generative powers by means of frigid herbs or anything else that can be thought of,
       therefore much more can the devil do this, since he has greater knowledge and cunning.
              Answer. The truth is sufficiently evident from two matters which have already been argued,
       although the method of obstruction has not been specifically declared. For it has been shown that
       witchcraft does not exist only in men's imaginations, and not in fact; but that truly and actually in
       numerable bewitchments can happen, with the permission of God. It has been shown, too, that God
       permits it more in the case of the generative powers, because of their greater corruption, than in the
       case of other human actions. But concerning the method by which such obstruction is procured, it
       is to be noted that it does not affect only the generative powers, but also the powers of the
       imagination or fancy.


file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_08a.html (1 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:03 PM]
Part I, Question VIII

             And as to this, Peter of Palude (III, 34) notes five methods. For he says that the devil, being a
       spirit, has power over a corporeal creature to cause or prevent a local motion. Therefore he can
       prevent bodies from approaching each other, either directly or indirectly, by interposing himself in
       some bodily shape. In this way it happened to the young man who was betrothed to an idol and
       nevertheless married a young maiden, and was consequently unable to copulate with her.
       Secondly, he can excite a man to that act, or freeze his desire for it, by the virtue of secret things of
       which he best knows the power. Thirdly, he can also disturb a man's perception and imagination as
       to make the woman appear loathsome to him: since he can, as had been said, influence the
       imagination. Fourthly, he can directly prevent the erection of that member which is adapted to
       fructification, just as he can prevent local motion. Fifthly, he can prevent the flow of the vital
       essence to the members in which lie the motive power; by closing as it were the seminary ducts, so
       that it does not descend to the generative channels, or falls back from them, or does not project
       from them, or in any of many ways fails in its function.
             And he continues in agreement with what has been treated of above by other Doctors. For
       God allows the devil more latitude in respect of this act, through which sin was first spread abroad,
       than of other human acts. Similarly, serpents are more subject to magic spells than are other
       animals. And a little later he says: It is the same in the case of a woman, for the devil can so
       darken her understanding that she considers her husband so loathsome that not for all the world
       would she allow him to lie with her.
             Later he wishes to find the reason why more men than women are bewitched in respect of that
       action; and he says that such obstruction generally occurs in the matter of erection, which can
       more easily happen to men; and therefore more men than women are bewitched. It might also be
       said that, the greater part of witches being women, they lust more for men than for women. Also
       they act in the despite of married women, finding every opportunity for adultery when the husband
       is able to copulate with other women but not with his own wife; and similarly the wife also has to
       seek other lovers.
             He adds also that God allows the devil to afflict sinners more bitterly than the just. Wherefore
       the Angel said to Tobias: He gives the devil power over those who are given up to lust. But he has
       power also against the just sometimes, as in the case of Job, but not in respect of the genital
       functions. Wherefore they ought to devote themselves to confession and other good works, lest the
       iron remain in the wound, and it be in vain to apply remedies. So much for Peter. But the method
       of removing such effects will be shown in the Second Part of this work.

                                       Some Incidental Doubts on the subject of Copulation
                                            prevented by Evil Spells are made Clear.
             But incidentally, if it is asked why this function is sometimes obstructed in respect of one
       woman but not of another, the answer, according to S. Bonaventura, is this. Either the enchantress
       of witch afflicts in this way those persons upon whom the devil has determined; or it is because
       God will not permit it to be inflicted on certain persons. For the hidden purpose of God in this is
       obscure, as is shown in the case of the wife of Tobias. And he adds:
             If it is asked how the devil does this, it is to be said that he obstructs the genital power, not
       intrinsically by harming the organ, but extrinsically by rendering it useless. Therefore, since it is
       an artificial and not a natural obstruction, he can make a man impotent towards one woman but not
       towards others: by taking away the inflammation of his lust for her, but not for other women,
       either through his own power, or through some herb or stone, or some occult natural means. And

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_08a.html (2 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:03 PM]
Part I, Question VIII

       this agrees with the words of Peter of Palude.
              Besides, since impotency in this act is sometimes due to coldness of nature, or some natural
       defect, it is asked how it is possible to distinguish whether it is due to witchcraft of not. Hostiensis
       gives the answer in his Summa (but this must not be publicly preached): When the member is in no
       way stirred, and can never perform the act of coition, this is a sign of frigidity of nature; but when
       it is stirred and becomes erect, but yet cannot perform, it is a sign of witchcraft.
              It is to be noted also that impotence of the member to perform the act is not the only
       bewitchment; but sometimes the woman is caused to be unable to conceive, or else she miscarries.
              Note, moreover, that according to what is aid down by the Canons, whoever through desire of
       vengeance or for hatred does anything to a man or a woman to prevent them from begetting or
       conceiving must be considered a homicide. And note, further, that the Canon speaks of loose
       lovers who, to save their mistresses from shame, use contraceptives, such as potions, or herbs that
       contravene nature, without any help from devils. And such penitents are to be punished as
       homicides. But witches who do such things by witchcraft are by law punishable by the extreme
       penalty, as had been touched on above in the First Question.
              And for a solution of the arguments; when it is objected that these things cannot happen to
       those joined together in matrimony, it is further to be noted that, even if the truth in this matter had
       not already been made sufficiently plain, yet these things can truly and actually happen just as
       much to those who are married as to those who are not. And the prudent reader who has plenty of
       books, will refer to the Theologians and the Canonists, especially where they speak of the impotent
       and bewitched. He will find them in agreement in condemning two errors: especially with regard
       to married people who seem to think that such bewitchment cannot happen to those who are joined
       in matrimony, advancing the reason that the devil cannot destroy the works of God.
              And the first error which they condemn is that of those who say that there is no witchcraft in
       the world, but only in the imagination of men who, through their ignorance of hidden causes which
       no man yet understands, ascribe certain natural effects to witchcraft, as though they were effected
       not by hidden causes, but by devils working either by themselves or in conjunction with witches.
       And although all other Doctors condemn this error as a pure falsehood, yet S. Thomas impugns it
       more vigorously and stigmatizes it as actual heresy, saying that this error proceeds from the root of
       infidelity. And since infidelity in a Christian is accounted heresy, therefore such deserve to be
       suspected as heretics. And this matter was touched on in the First Question, though it was not there
       declared so plainly. For if anyone considers the other sayings of S. Thomas in other places, he will
       find the reasons why he affirms that such an error proceeds from the root of infidelity.
              For in his questions concerning Sin, where he treats of devils, and in his first question,
       whether devils have bodies that naturally belong to them, among many other matters he makes
       mention of those who referred every physical effect to the virtue of the stars; to which they said
       that the hidden causes of terrestrial effects were subject. And he says: It must be considered that
       the Peripatetics,the followers of Aristotle, held that devils did not really exist; but that those things
       which are attributed to devils proceeded from the power of the stars and other natural phenomena.
       Wherefore S. Augustine says (de Ciuitate Dei, X), that it was the opinion of Porphyry that from
       herbs and animals, and certain sounds and voice, and from figures and figments observed in the
       motion of the stars, powers corresponding to the stars were fabricated on earth by men in order to
       explain various natural effect. And the error of these is plain, since they referred everything to
       hidden causes in the stars, holding that devils were only fabricated by the imagination of men.
              But this opinion is clearly proved to be false by S. Thomas in the same work; for some works
       of devils are found which can in no way proceed from any natural cause. For example, when one

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_08a.html (3 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:03 PM]
Part I, Question VIII

       who is possessed by devil speaks in an unknown language; and many other devil's works are
       found, both in the Rhapsodic and the Necromantic arts, which can in no way proceed except from
       some Intelligence, which may be naturally good but is evil in its intention. And therefore, because
       of these incongruities, other Philosophers were compelled to admit that there were devils. Yet they
       afterwards fell into various errors, some thinking that the souls of men, when they left their bodies,
       became devils. For this reason many Soothsayers have killed children, that they might have their
       souls as their co-operators; and many other errors are recounted.
             From this it is clear that not without reason does the Holy Doctor say that such an opinion
       proceeds from the root of infidelity. And anyone who wishes may read S. Augustine (de Ciuitate
       Dei, VIII, IX) on the various errors of infidels concerning the nature of devils. And indeed the
       common opinion of all Doctors, quoted in the above-mentioned work, against those who err in this
       way by denying that there are any witches, is very weighty in its meaning, even if it is expressed in
       few words. For they say that they who maintain that there is no witchcraft in the world go contrary
       to the opinion of all the Doctors, and of the Holy Scripture; and declare that there are devils, and
       that devils have power over the bodies and imaginations of men, with the permission of God.
       Wherefore, those who are the instruments of the devils, at whose instance the devil at times do
       mischief to a creature, they call witches.
             Now in the Doctor's condemnation of this first error nothing is said concerning those joined
       together in matrimony; but this is made clear in their condemnation of the second error of
       believing that, though witchcraft exists and abounds in the world, even against carnal copulation,
       yet, since no such bewitchment can be considered to be permanent, it never annuls a marriage that
       has already been contracted. Here is where they speak of those joined in matrimony. Now in
       refuting this error (for we do so, even though it is little to the point, for the sake of those who have
       not many books), it is to be noted that they refute it by maintaining that it is against all precedent,
       and contrary to all laws both ancient and modern.
             Wherefore the Catholic Doctors make the following distinction, that impotence caused by
       witchcraft is either temporary or permanent. And if it is temporary, then it does not annul the
       marriage. Moreover, it is presumed to be temporary of they are able to healed of the impediment
       within three years from their cohabitation, having taken all possible pain, either through the
       sacraments of the Church, or through other remedies, to be cured. But if they are not then cured by
       any remedy, from that time it is presumed to be permanent. And in that case it either precedes both
       the contracting of a marriage, and annuls one that is not yet contracted; or else it follows the
       contract of marriage but precedes its consummation, and then also, according to some, it annuls
       the previous contract. (For it is said in Book XXXII, quest. 1. cap. 1 that the confirmation of a
       marriage consists in its carnal office.) Or else it is subsequent to the consummation of the
       marriage, and then the matrimonial bond is not annulled. Much is noted there concerning
       impotence by Hostiensis, and Godfrey, and the Doctors and Theologians.
             To the arguments. As to the first, it is made sufficiently clear from what has been said. For as
       to the argument that God's works can be destroyed by the devil's works, if witchcraft has power
       against those who are married, it has no force; rather does the opposite appear, since the devil can
       do nothing without God's permission. For he does not destroy by main force like a tyrant, but
       through some extrinsic art, as is proved above. And the second argument is also made quite clear,
       why God allows this obstruction more in the case of the venereal act than of other acts. But the
       devil has power also over other acts, when God permits. Wherefore it is not sound to argue that he
       could destroy the whole world. And the third objection is similarly answered by what has been
       said.

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_08a.html (4 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:03 PM]
Part I, Question VIII

                                                                     Page 1 of 1


                                                                  Question IX

                                                               Main Index


                                           This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                            HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                    All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_08a.html (5 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:03 PM]
Part II, Question IX


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                              PART I.
                                                            QUESTION IX.

Whether Witches may work some Prestidigatory Illusion so that the Male Organ appears to be entirely
                             removed and separate from the Body.

             Here is declared the truth about diabolic operations with regard to the male organ. And to
       make plain the facts in this matter, it is asked whether witches can with the help of devils really
       and actually remove the member, or whether they only do so apparently by some glamour or
       illusion. And that they can actually do so is argued a fortiori; for since devils can do greater things
       than this, as killing them or carrying them from place to place - as was shown above in the cases of
       Job and Tobias - therefore they can also truly and actually remove men's members.
             Again, an argument is taken from the gloss on the visitations of bad Angels, in the Psalms:
       God punishes by means of bad Angels, as He often punished the People of Israel with various
       diseases, truly and actually visited upon their bodies. Therefore the member is equally subject to
       such visitations.
             It may be said that this is done with the Divine permission. And in that case, it has already
       been said that God allows more power of witchcraft over the genital functions, on account of the
       first corruption of sin which came to us from the act of generation, so also He allows greater power
       over the actual genital organ, even to its removal.
             And again, it was a greater thing to turn Lot's wife into a pillar of salt than it is to take away
       the male organ; and that (Genesis xix) was a real and actual, not an apparent, metamorphosis (for it
       is said that that pillar is still to be seen), And this was done by a bad Angel; just as the good
       Angels struck the men of Sodom with blindness, so that they could not find the door of the house.
       And so it was with the other punishments of the men of Gomorrah. The gloss, indeed, affirms that
       Lot's wife was herself tainted with that vice, and therefore she was punished.
             And again, whoever can create a natural shape can also take it away. But devils have created
       many natural shapes, as is clear from Pharao's magicians, who with the help of devils made frogs
       and serpents. Also S. Augustine, in Book LXXXIII, says that those things which are visibly done
       by the lower powers of the air cannot be considered to be mere illusions; but even men are able, by
       some skilful incision, to remove the male organ; therefore devils can do invisibly what others do
       visibly.
             But on the contrary side, S. Augustine (de Ciuitate Dei, XVIII) says: It is not to be believed
       that, through the art or power of devils, man's body can be changed into the likeness of a beast;
       therefore it is equally impossible that that should be removed which is essential to the truth of the
       human body, Also he says (de Trinitate, III): It must not be thought that this substance of visible
       matter is subject to the will of those fallen angels; for it is subject only to God.
             Answer. There is no doubt that certain witches can do marvellous things with regard to male
       organs, for this agrees with what has been seen and heard by many, and with the general account


file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_09a.html (1 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:04 PM]
Part II, Question IX

       of what has been known concerning that member through the senses of sight and touch. And as to
       how this thing is possible, it is to be said that it can be done in two ways, either actually and in
       fact, as the first arguments have said, or through some prestige or glamour. But when it is
       performed by witches, it is only a matter of glamour; although it is no illusion in the opinion of the
       sufferer. For his imagination can really and actually believe that something is not present, since by
       none of his exterior sense, such as sight or touch, can he perceive that it is present.
             From this it may be said that there is a true abstraction of the member in imagination,
       although not in fact; and several things are to be noted as to how this happens. And first as to two
       methods by which it can be done. It is no wonder that the devil can deceive the outer human
       senses, since, as has been treated of above, he can illude the inner senses, by bringing to actual
       perception ideas that are stored in the imagination. Moreover, he deceives men in their natural
       functions, causing that which is visible to be invisible to them, and that which is tangible to be
       intangible, and the audible inaudible, and so with the other senses. But such things are not true in
       actual fact, since they are caused through some defect introduced in the sense, such as the eyes or
       the ears, or the touch, by reason of which defect a man's judgement is deceived.
             And we can illustrate this from certain natural phenomena. For sweet wine appears bitter on
       the tongue of the fevered, his taste being deceived not by the actual fact, but through his disease.
       So also in the case under consideration, the deception is not due to fact, since the member is still
       actually in its place; but it is an illusion of the sense with regard to it.
             Again, as has been said above concerning the generative powers, the devil can obstruct that
       action by imposing some other body of the same colour and appearance, in such a way that some
       smoothly fashioned body in the colour of flesh is interposed between the sight and touch, and
       between the true body of the sufferer, so that it seems to him that he can see and feel nothing but a
       smooth body with its surface interrupted by no genital organ. See the sayings of S. Thomas (2 dist.
       8. artic. 5) concerning glamours and illusions, and also in the second of the second, 91, and in his
       questions concerning Sin; where he frequently quotes that of S. Augustine in Book LXXXIII: This
       evil of the devil creeps in through all the sensual approaches; he gives himself to figures, he adapts
       himself to colours, he abides in sounds, he lurks in smells, he infuses himself into flavours.
             Besides, it is to be considered that such an illusion of the sight and touch can be caused not
       only by the interposition of some smooth unmembered body, but also by the summoning to the
       fancy or imagination of certain forms and ideas latent in the mind, in such a way that a thing is
       imagined as being perceived then for the first time. For, as was shown in the preceding question,
       devils can by their own power change bodies locally; and just as the disposition or humour can be
       affected in this way, so can the natural functions. I speak of things which appear natural to the
       imagination or senses. For Aristotle in the de Somno et Uigila says, assigning the cause of
       apparitions in dreams, that when an animal sleeps much blood flows to the inner consciousness,
       and thence come ideas or impressions derived from actual previous experiences stored in the mind.
       It has already been defined how thus certain appearance convey the impressions of new
       experiences. And since this can happen naturally, much more can the devil call to the imagination
       the appearance of a smooth body unprovided with the virile member, in such a way that the sense
       believe it to be an actual fact.
             Secondly, some other methods are to be noted which are easier to understand and to explain.
       For, according to S. Isidore (Etym. VIII, 9), a glamour is nothing but a certain delusion of the
       senses, and especially of the eyes. And for this reason it is also called a prestige, from prestringo,
       since the sight of the eyes is so fettered that things seem to be other than they are. And Alexander


file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_09a.html (2 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:04 PM]
Part II, Question IX

       of Hales, Part 2, says that a prestige, properly understood, is an illusion of the devil, which is not
       caused by any change in matter, but only exists in the mind of him who is deluded, either as to his
       inner or outer perceptions.
             Wherefore, in a manner of speaking, we may say even of human prestidigitatory art, that it
       can be effected in three ways. For the first, it can be done without devils, since it is artificially
       done by the agility of men who show things and conceal them, as in the case of the tricks of
       conjurers and ventriloquists. The second method is also without the help of devils; as when men
       can use some natural virtue in natural bodies or minerals so as to impart to such objects some other
       appearance quite different from their true appearance. Wherefore, according to S. Thomas (I, 114,
       4), and several others, men, by the smoke of certain smouldering or lighted herbs, can make rods
       appear to be serpents.
             The third method of delusion is effected with the help of devils, the permission of God being
       granted. For it is clear that devils have, of their nature, some power over certain earthly matters,
       which they exercise upon them, when God permits, so that things appear to be other than they are.
             And as to this third method, it is to be noted that the devil has fives ways in which he can
       delude anyone so that he thinks a thing to be other than it is. First, by an artificial tricks, as has
       been said; for that which a man can do by art, the devil can do even better. Second, by a natural
       method, by the application, as has been said, and interposition of some substance so as to hide the
       true body, or by confusing it in man's fancy. The third way is when in an assumed body he
       presents himself as being something which he is not; as witness the story which S. Gregory tells in
       his First Dialogue of a Nun, who ate a lettuce, which, however, as the devil confessed, was not a
       lettuce, but the devil in the form of a lettuce, or in the lettuce itself. Or as when he appeared to S.
       Antony in a lump of gold which he found in the desert. Or as when he touches a real man, and
       makes him appear like a brute animal, as will shortly be explained. The fourth method is when he
       confuses the organ of sight, so that a clear thing seems hazy, or the converse, or when an old
       woman appears to be a young girl. For even after weeping the light appears different from what it
       was before. His fifth method is by working in the imaginative power, and, by a disturbance of the
       humours, effecting a transmutation in the forms perceived by the senses, as has been treated of
       before, so that the senses then perceive as it were fresh and new images. And accordingly, by the
       last three of these methods, and even by the second, the devil can cast a glamour over the senses of
       a man. Wherefore there is no difficulty in his concealing the virile member by some prestige or
       glamour. And a manifest proof or example of this, which was revealed to us in our Inquisitorial
       capacity, will be set forth later, where more is recounted of these and other matters in the Second
       Part of this Treatise.

                               How a Bewitchment can be Distinguished from a Natural Defect.

             An incidental question, with certain other difficulties, follows. Peter's member has been taken
       off, and he does not know whether it is by witchcraft or in some other way by the devil's power,
       with the permission of God. Are there any ways of determining or distinguishing between these? It
       can be answered as follows. First, that those to whom such things most commonly happen are
       adulterers or fornicators. For when they fail to respond to the demand of their mistress, or if they
       wish to desert them and attach themselves to other women, then their mistress, out of vengeance,
       through some other power causes their members to be taken off. Secondly, it can be distinguished
       by the fact that it is not permanent. For if it is not due to witchcraft, then the loss is not permanent,
       but it will be restored some time.

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_09a.html (3 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:04 PM]
Part II, Question IX

            But here there arises another doubt, whether it is due to the nature of the witchcraft that it is
       not permanent. It is answered that it can be permanent, and last until death, just as the Canonists
       and Theologians judge concerning the impediment of witchcraft in matrimony, that the temporary
       can become permanent. For Godfrey says in his Summa: A bewitchment cannot always be
       removed by him who caused it, either because he is dead, or because he does not know how to
       remove it, or because the charm has been lost. Wherefore we may say in the same way that the
       charm which has been worked on Peter will be permanent if the witch who did it cannot heal him.
            For there are three degrees of witches. For some both heal and harm; some harm, but cannot
       heal; and some seem able only to heal, that is, to take away injuries, as will be shown later. For
       thus it happened to us: Two witches were quarreling, and while they were taunting each other one
       said: I am not so wicked as you, for I know how to heal those whom I injure. The charm will also
       be permanent if, before it has been healed, the witch departs, either by changing her dwelling or by
       dying. For S. Thomas also says: Any charm may be permanent when it is such as can have no
       human remedy; or if it has a remedy, it is not known to men, or unlawful; although God can find a
       remedy through a holy Angel who can coerce the devil, if not the witch.
            However, the chief remedy against witchcraft is the sacrament of Penitence. For bodily
       infirmity often proceeds from sin. And how the charms or witches can be removed will be shown
       in the Second Part of this Treatise, and in the Second QUestion, chapter VI, where other different
       matters are treated of and explained.

                                                         Solutions of the Arguments.

             For the first, it is clear that there is no doubt but that, just as, with God's permission, they can
       kill men, so also can devils taken off that member, as well as others, truly and actually. But then
       the devils do not work through the medium of witches, concerning which mention has already
       been made. And from this the answer to the second argument is also made clear. But this is to be
       said: that God allows more power of witchcraft over the genital forces because, etc.; and therefore
       even allows that that member should be truly and actually taken off. But it is not valid to say that
       this always happens. For it would not be after the manner of witchcraft for it to happen so; and
       even the witches, when they do such works, do not pretend that they have not the power to restore
       the member when they wish to and know how to do so. From which it is clear that it is not actually
       taken off, but only by a glamour. As for the third, concerning the metamorphosis of Lot's wife, we
       say that this was actual, and not a glamour. And as to the fourth, that devils can create certain
       substantial shapes, and therefore can also remove them: it is to be said with regard to Pharaoh's
       magicians that they made true serpents; and that devils can, with the help of another agent,
       produce certain effects on imperfect creatures which they cannot on men, who are God's chief
       care. For it is said: Does God care for oxen? They can, nevertheless, with the permission of God,
       do to men true and actual harm, as also they can create a glamour of harm, and by this the answer
       to the last argument is made clear.
                                                       Page 1 of 1




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_09a.html (4 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:04 PM]
Part II, Question IX

                                                              Question X

                                                           Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                       HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                               All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_09a.html (5 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:04 PM]
Notes

           “Alexander.” Alexander of Hales, the Franciscan theologian and philosopher, Doctor
        Irregragabilis, was one of the greatest of the scholastics. He was born at Hales, or Hailles, in
        Gloucestershire towards the end of the twelfth century, and died at Paris at the convent of his
        Order in 1245. His principal work is the “Summa Uniuersae Theologiae,” begun about the year
        1231, and left unfinished. It has several times been published: Venice, 1475, 1576; Nuremburg,
        1481, 1502; Pavia, 1481; Cologne, 1622. A critical edition, which is much needed, has been
        promised by the Quaracchi editors of the works of S. Bonaventura.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0052.html [2002-01-20 12:03:04 PM]
Part I, Question X


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                               PART I.
                                                             QUESTION X.

                          Whether Witches can by some Glamour Change Men into Beasts.

             Here we declare the truth as to whether and how witches transform men into beasts. And it is
       argued that this is not possible, from the following passage of Episcopus (XXVI, 5): Whoever
       believes that it is possible for any creature to be changed for the better or for the worse, or to be
       transformed into any other shape or likeness, except by the Creator Himself, Who made all things,
       is without doubt an infidel, and worse than a pagan.
             And we will quote the arguments of S. Thomas in the 2nd Book of Sentences, VIII: Whether
       devils can affect the bodily sense by the delusion of a glamour. There he argues first that they
       cannot. For though that shape of a beast which is seen must be somewhere, it cannot exist only in
       the senses; for the sense perceive no shape that is not received from actual matter, and there is no
       actual beast there; and he adduces the authority of the Canon. And again, that which seems to be,
       cannot really be; as in the case of a woman who seems to be a beast, for two substantial shapes
       cannot exist at one and the same time in the same matter. Therefore, since that shape of a beast
       which appears cannot exist anywhere, no glamour or illusion can exist in the eye of the beholder;
       for the sight must have some object in which it terminates.
             And if it is argued that the shape exists in the surrounding atmosphere, this is not possible;
       both because the atmosphere is not capable of taking any shape or form, and also because the air
       around that person is not always constant, and cannot be so on account of its fluid nature,
       especially when it is moved. And again because in that case such a transformation would be visible
       to everyone; but this is not so, because the devils seem to be unable to deceive the sight of Holy
       Men in the least.
             Besides, the sense of sight, or the faculty of vision, is a passive faculty, and every passive
       faculty is set in motion by the active agent that corresponds to it. Now the active agent
       corresponding to sight is twofold: one is the origin of the act, or the object; the other is the carrier,
       or medium. But that apparent shape cannot be the object of the sense, neither can it be the medium
       through which it is carried. First, it cannot be the object, since it cannot be taken hold of by
       anything, as was shown in the foregoing argument, since it does not exist in the senses received
       from an object, neither is it in the actual object, nor even in the air, as in a carrying medium, as
       was treated of above in the third argument.
             Besides, if the devil moves the inner consciousness, he does so either by projecting himself
       into the cognitive faculty, or by changing it. But he does not do so by projecting himself; for he
       would either have to assume a body, and even so could not penetrate into the inner organ of
       imagination; for two bodies cannot be at the same time in the same place; or he would assume a
       phantasmal body; and this again would be impossible, since no phantasm is quite without
       substance.


file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_10a.html (1 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:05 PM]
Part I, Question X

             Similarly also he cannot do it by changing the cognition. For he would either change it by
       alteration, which he does not seem able to do, since all alteration is caused by active qualities, in
       which the devils are lacking; or he would change it by transformation or local motion; and this
       does not seem feasible for two reasons. First, because a transformation or an organ cannot be effect
       without a sense of pain. Secondly, because in this case the devil would only make things of a
       known shape appear; but S. Augustine says that he creates shapes of this sort, both known and
       unknown. Therefore it seems that the devils can in no way deceive the imagination or senses of a
       man.
             But against this, S. Augustine says (de Ciuitate Dei, XVIII) that the transmutations of men
       into brute animals, said to be done by the art of devils, are not actual but only apparent. But this
       would not be possible if devils were not able to transmute the human senses. The authority of S.
       Augustine is again to the point in Book LXXXIII, which has already been quoted: This evil of the
       devil creeps in through all the sensual approaches, etc.
             Answer. If the reader wishes to refer to the method of transmutation, he will find in the
       Second Part of this work, chapter VI, various methods. But proceeding for the present in a
       scholastic manner, let us say in agreement with the opinions of the three Doctors, that the devil can
       deceive the human fancy so that a man really seems to be an animal. The last of those opinions,
       which is that of S. Thomas, is more subtle than the rest. But the first is that of S. Antoninus in the
       first part of his Summa, V, 5, where he declares that the devil at times works to deceive a man's
       fancy, especially by an illusion of the senses; and he proves this by natural reasoning, by the
       authority of the Canon, and by a great number of examples.
             And at first as follows: Our bodies naturally are subject to and obey the angelic nature as
       regards local motion. But the bad angels, although the have lost grace, have not lost their natural
       power, as has often been said before. And since the faculty of fancy or imagination is corporeal,
       that is, allied to a physical organ, it also is naturally subject to devils, so that they can transmute it,
       causing various phantasies, by the flow of the thoughts and perceptions to the original image
       received by them. So says S. Antoninus, and adds that it is proved by the following Canon
       (Episcopus, XXVI, 5): It must not be omitted that certain wicked women, perverted by Satan and
       seduced by the illusions and phantasms of devils, believe and profess that they ride in the night
       hours on certain beasts with Diana, the heathen goddess, or with Herodias, and with a countless
       number of women, and that in the untimely silence of night they travel over great distances of
       land. And later: Wherefore priests ought to preach to the people of God that they should know this
       to be altogether false, and that when such phantasms afflict the minds of the faithful, it is not of
       God, but of an evil spirit. For Satan himself transforms himself into the shape and likeness of
       different persons, and in dreams deluding the mind which he holds captive, leads it through
       devious ways.
             Indeed the meaning of this Canon has been treated of in the First Question, as to the four
       things which are to be preached. But it would be to misunderstand its meaning to maintain that
       witches cannot be so transported, when they wish and God does not prevent it; for very often men
       who are not witches are unwillingly transported bodily over great distances of land.
             But that these transmutations can be effected in both ways will be shown by the aforesaid
       Summa, and in the chapter where S. Augustine relates that it is read in the books of the Gentiles
       that a certain sorceress named Circe changed the companions of Ulysses into beasts; but that this
       was due to some glamour or illusion, rather than an actual accomplishment, by altering the fancies
       of men; and this is clearly proved by several examples.


file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_10a.html (2 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:05 PM]
Part I, Question X

             For we read in the Lives of the Fathers, that a certain girl would not consent to a young man
       who was begging her to commit a shameful act with him. And the young man, being angry
       because of this, caused a certain Jew to work a charm against her, by which she was changed into a
       filly. But this metamorphosis was not an actual fact, but an illusion of the devil, who changed the
       fancy and sense of the girl herself, and of those who looked at her, so that she seemed to be a filly,
       who was really a girl. For when she was led to the Blessed Macarius, the devil could not so work
       as to deceive his senses as he had those of other people, on account of his sanctity; for to him she
       seemed a true girl, not a filly. And at length by his prayer she was set free from that illusion, and it
       is said that this had happened to her because she did not give her mind to holy things, or attend the
       Sacraments as she ought; therefore the devil had power over her, although she was in other
       respects honest.
             Therefore the devil can, by moving the inner perceptions and humours, effect changes in the
       actions and faculties, physical, mental, and emotional, working by means of any physical organ
       soever; and this accords with S. Thomas, I, 91. And of this sort we may believe to have been the
       acts of Simon Magus in the incantations which are narrated of him. But the devil can do none of
       these things without the permission of God, Who with His good Angels often restrains the
       wickedness of him who seeks to deceive and hurt us. Wherefore S. Augustine, speaking of
       witches, says: These are they who, with the permission of God, stir up the elements, and confuse
       the minds of those who do not trust in God (XXVI, 5).
             Also devils can by witchcraft cause a man to be unable to see his wife rightly, and the
       converse. And this comes from an affectation of the fancy, so that she is represented to him as an
       odious and horrible thing. The devil also suggests representations of loathsome things to the fancy
       of both the waking and the sleeping, to deceive them and lead them to son. But because sin does
       not consist in the imagination but in the will, therefore man does not sin in these fancies suggested
       by the devil, and these various transformations, unless of his own will he consents to sin.
             The second opinion of the modern Doctors is to the same effect, when they declare what is
       glamour, and how many ways the devil can cause such illusions. Here we refer to what has already
       been said concerning the arguments of S. Antoninus, which there is no need to repeat.
             The third opinion is that of S. Thomas, and is an answer to the argument where it is asked,
       Wherein lies the existence of the shape of a beast that is seen; in the senses, or in reality, or in the
       surrounding air? And his opinion is that the apparent shape of a beast only exists in the inner
       perception, which, through the force of imagination, sees it in some way as an exterior object. And
       the devil has two ways of effecting such a result.
             In one way we may say that the forms of animals which are conserved in the treasury of the
       imagination pass by the operation of the devil into the organs of inner senses; and in this way it
       happens in dreams, as has been declared above. And so, when these forms are impressed on the
       organs of the outer senses, such as sight, they appear as if they were present as outer objects, and
       could actually be touched.
             The other way results from a change in the inner organs of perception, through which the
       judgement is deceived; as is shown in the case of him who has his taste corrupted, so that
       everything sweet seems bitter; and this is not very different from the first method. Moreover, even
       men can accomplish this by the virtue of certain natural things, as when in the vapour of a certain
       smoke the beams of a house appear to be serpents; and many other instances of this are found, as
       had been mentioned above.

                                                         Solutions of the Arguments.

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_10a.html (3 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:05 PM]
Part I, Question X


             As to the first argument, that text is often quoted, but it is badly understood. For as to where it
       speaks of transformation into another shape or likeness, it has been made clear how this can be
       done by prestidigitatory art. And as to where it says that no creature can be made by the power of
       the devil, this is manifestly true if Made is understood to mean Created. But if the word Made is
       taken to refer to natural production, it is certain that devils can make some imperfect creatures.
       And S. Thomas shows how this may be done. For he says that all transmutations of bodily matters
       which can be effected by the forces of nature, in which the essential thing is the semen which is
       found in the elements of this world, on land or in the waters (as serpents and frogs and such things
       deposit their semen), can be effected by the work of devils who have acquired such semen. So also
       it is when anything is changed into serpents or frogs, which can be generated by putrefaction.
             But those transmutations of bodily matters which cannot be effected by the forces of nature
       can in no way be truly effected by the work of the devils. For when the body of a man is changed
       into the body of a beast, or a dead body is brought to life, such things only seem to happen, and are
       a glamour or illusion; or else the devil appears before men in an assumed body.
             These arguments are substantiated. For Blessed Albertus in his book On Animals, where he
       examines whether devils, or let us even say witches, can really make animals, says that they can,
       with God's permission, make imperfect animals. But they cannot do so in an instant, as God does,
       but by means of some motion, however sudden, as is clear in the case of witches. And touching the
       passage in Exodus vii, where Pharao called his wise men, he says: The devils run throughout the
       world and collect various germs, and by using them can evolve various species. And the gloss
       thereon says: When witches attempt to effect anything by the invocation of devils, they run about
       the world and bring the semen of those things which are in question, and by its means, with the
       permission of God, they produce new species. But this has been spoken of above.
             Another difficulty may arise, whether such devils' works are to be deemed miraculous. The
       answer was made clear in the preceding arguments, that even the devils can perform certain
       miracles to which their natural powers are adapted. And although such things are true in fact, they
       are not done with a view to the knowledge of the truth; and in this sense the works of Antichrist
       may be said to be deceptions, since they are done with a view to the seduction of men.
             The answer to the other argument, that concerning the shape, is also clear. The shape of a
       beast which is seen does not exist in the air, but only in the perception of the senses, as has been
       demonstrated above from the opinion of S. Thomas.
             For the argument that every passive is set in motion by its corresponding active, this is
       granted. But when it is inferred that the shape which is seen cannot be the original object which
       sets in motion the act of sight, since it arises from none of the sense, it is answered that it does not
       arise, since it originates from some sensible image conserved in the imagination, which the devil
       can draw out and present to the imagination or power of perception, as has been said above.
             For the last argument, it is to be said that the devil does not, as has been shown, change the
       perceptive and imaginative powers by projecting himself into them, but by transmuting them; not
       indeed by altering them, except in respect of local motion. For he cannot of himself induce new
       appearances, as has been said. But he changes them by transmutation, that is, local motion. And
       this again he does, not by dividing the substance of the organ of perception, since that would result
       in a sense of pain, but by a movement of the perceptions and humours.
                                                    Page 1 of 2




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_10a.html (4 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:05 PM]
Part I, Question X

                                               Question X Continued . . . .

                                                           Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                       HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                               All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_10a.html (5 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:05 PM]
Notes

           “S. Antoninus.” The famous Dominican Archbishop of Florence, born at Florence, 1 March,
        1389; died 2 May, 1459. His feast day is 10 May. His chief literary work is the “Summa
        Theologica Moralis, partibus IV distincta,” written shortly before his death, and marking a very
        considerable development in moral theology. Crohns in his “Die Summa theologica des Antonin
        von Florenz und die Schützung des Weibes im Hexenhammer,” Helsingfors, 1903, has set out to
        show that the very pronounced misogyny which is apparent in the “Malleus Maleficarum” can be
        traced to the “Summa” of S. Antoninus. But Paulus, “Die Verachtung der Frau beim hl. Antonin,”
        in “Historisch-Politische Blütter,” 1904, pp. 812-30, has severely criticized this thesis, which he
        declares to be untenable.
           Within fifty years after the first appearance of the “Summa” of S. Antoninus, fifteen editions
        were printed at various important centres of learning. Many other editions followed, and in 1740 it
        was issued at Verona in four volumes, folio, edited by P. Ballerini; in 1741 at Florence by two
        Dominicans, Mamachi and Remedelli.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0053.html [2002-01-20 12:03:05 PM]
Part I, Question X - P.2


                                   THE
                           MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                        PART I.
                                               QUESTION X. CONTINUED . . . .

             But it may be further objected as follows: that according to this the devil cannot present to a
       man the appearance of anything new in respect of things seen. It is to be said that a new thing can
       be understood in two ways. In once way it may be entirely new both in itself and its beginnings;
       and in this sense the devil cannot present anything new to a man's sense of vision: for he cannot
       cause one who is born blind to imagine colours, or a deaf man to imagine sounds. In another sense,
       a thing may be new as to the composition of its whole; as we may say that it is an imaginatively
       new thing if a man imagines that he sees mountain of gold, which he never saw; for he has seen
       gold, and he has seen a mountain, and can by some natural operation imagine the phantasm of a
       mountain of gold. And in this way the devil can present a new thing to the imagination.

          What is to be Thought of Wolves which sometimes Seize and Eat Men and Children out of their
                           Cradles: whether this also is a Glamour caused by Witches.
             There is incidentally a question concerning wolves, which sometimes snatch men and
       children out of their houses and eat them, and run about with such astuteness that by no skill or
       strength can they be hurt or captured. It is to be said that this sometimes has a natural cause, but is
       sometimes due to a glamour, when it is effected by witches. And as to the first, Blessed Albertus in
       his book On Animals says that it can arise from five causes. Sometimes on account of great
       famine, when stags and other beasts have come near to men. Sometimes on account of the
       fierceness of their strength, as in the case of dogs in cold regions. But this is nothing to the point;
       and we say that such things are caused by an illusion of devils, when God punishes some nation
       for sin. See Leviticus xxvi: If ye do not my commandments, I will send the beasts of the field
       against you, who shall consume you and your flocks. And again Deuteronomy xxxii: I will also
       send the teeth of beast upon them, etc.
             As to the question whether they are true wolves, or devils appearing in that shape, we say that
       they are true wolves, but are possessed by devils; and they are so roused up in two ways. It may
       happen without the operation of witches: and so it was in the case of the two-and-forty boys who
       were devoured by two bears coming out of the woods, because they mocked the prophet Elisaus,
       saying, Go up, thou bald head, etc. Also in the case of the lion which slew the prophet who would
       not perform the commandment of God (III. Kings xiii). And it is told that a Bishop of Vienna
       ordered the minor Litanies to be solemnly chanted on certain days before the Feast of the
       Ascension, because wolves were entering the city and publicly devouring men.
             But in another way it may be an illusion caused by witches. For William of Paris tells of a
       certain man who thought that he was turned into a wolf, and at certain times went hiding among
       the caves. For there he went at a certain time, and though he remained there all the time stationary,
       he believed that he was a wolf which went about devouring children; and though the devil, having
       possessed a wolf, was really doing this, he erroneously thought that he was prowling about in his

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_10b.html (1 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:03:05 PM]
Part I, Question X - P.2

       sleep. And he was for so long thus out of his senses that he was at last found lying in the wood
       raving. The devil delights in such things, and caused the illusion of the pagans who believed that
       men and old women were changed into beasts. From this it is seen that such things only happen by
       the permission of God along and through the operation of devils, and not through any natural
       defect; since by no art or strength can such wolves be injured or captured. In this connexion also
       Vincent of Beauvais (in Spec. Hist., VI, 40) tells that in Gaul, before the Incarnation of Christ, and
       before the Punic War, a wolf snatched a sentry's sword out of its sheath.
                                                 Page 2 of 2


                                                             Question XI

                                                           Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                           HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                   All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_10b.html (2 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:03:05 PM]
Notes

            “A wolf.” There are two kinds of werewolves, voluntary and involuntary. The voluntary were,
        of course, wizards, such as Gilles Garnier, who on 18 January, 1573, was condemned by the court
        of Dôle, Lyons, to be burned alive for “the abominable crimes of lycanthropy and witchcraft.”
        More than fifty witnesses deposed that he had attacked and killed children in the fields and
        vineyards, devouring their raw flesh. He was sometimes seen in himan shape, sometimes as a
        “loup-garou.” During the sixteenth century in France lycanthropy was very prevalent, and
        cannibalism were rife in many county districts.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0054.html [2002-01-20 12:03:06 PM]
Part I, Question XI


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                              PART I.
                                                            QUESTION XI.

That Witches who are Midwives in Various Ways Kill the Child Conceived in the Womb, and Procure an
                 Abortion; or if they do not this Offer New-born Children to Devils.

              Here is set forth the truth concerning four horrible crimes which devils commit against
       infants, both in the mother's womb and afterwards. And since the devils do these things through
       the medium of women, and not men, this form of homicide is associated rather with women than
       with men, And the following are the methods by which it is done.
              The Canonists treat more fully than the Theologians of the obstructions due to witchcraft; and
       they say that is is witchcraft, not only when anyone is unable to perform the carnal act, of which
       we have spoken above; but also when a woman is prevented from conceiving, or is made to
       miscarry after she has conceived. A third and fourth method of witchcraft is when they have failed
       to procure an abortion, and then either devour the child or offer it to a devil.
              There is no doubt concerning the first two methods, since, without the help of devils, a man
       can by natural means, such as herbs, savin for example, or other emmenagogues, procure that a
       woman cannot generate or conceive, as has bee mentioned above. But with the other two methods
       it is different; for they are effected by witches. And there is no need to bring forward the
       arguments, since very evident instances and examples will more readily show the truth of this
       matter.
              The former of these two abominations is the fact that certain witches, against the instinct of
       human nature, and indeed against the nature of all beasts, with the possible exception of wolves,
       are in the habit of devouring and eating infant children. And concerning this, the Inquisitor of
       Como, who has been mentioned before, has told us the following: that he was summoned by the
       inhabitants of the County of Barby to hold an inquisition, because a certain man had missed his
       child from its cradle, and finding a congress of women in the night-time, swore that he saw them
       kill his child and drink its blood and devour it. Also, in one single year, which is the year now last
       passed, he says that forty-one witches were burned, certain others taking flight to the Lord
       Archduke of Austria, Sigismund. For confirmation of this there are certain writings of John Nider
       in his Formicarius, of whom, as of those events which he recounts, the memory is still fresh in
       men's minds; wherefore it is apparent that such things are not incredible. We must add that in all
       these matters witch midwives cause yet greater injuries, as penitent witches have often told to us
       and to others, saying: No one does more harm to the Catholic Faith than midwives. For when they
       do not kill children, then, as if for some other purpose, they take them out of the room and, raising
       them up in the air, offer them to devils. But the method which they observe in crimes of this sort
       will be shown in the Second Part, which we must soon approach. But first one more question must
       be inquired into, namely, that of the Divine permission. For it was said at the beginning that three
       things are necessary for the effecting of witchcraft: the devil, a witch, and the Divine permission.


file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_11a.html (1 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:03:06 PM]
Part I, Question XI

                                                                Page 1 of 1


                                                            Question XII

                                                           Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                       HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                               All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_11a.html (2 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:03:06 PM]
Notes

            “Nider.” John Nider, O.P., was born 1380 in Swabia; and died at Colmar, 13 August, 1438. He
        gained a wide reputation as a preacher and was active at the Council of Constance. An advocate
        of the strictest reforms, he became eminent in the annals of his Order by his energy and example.
        The most important among his many works is the “Formicarius,” a treatise upon the theological,
        philosophical, and socal questions of the day. A complete edition was published at Douai, 5 vols.,
        1602. The tractate “De Maleficus” has often been printed separately.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0055.html [2002-01-20 12:03:06 PM]
Part I, Question XII - P.1


                                     THE
                             MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                               PART I.
                                                            QUESTION XII.

                  Whether the Permission of Almighty God is an Accompaniment of Witchcraft.

             Now we must consider the Divine permission itself, touching which four things are asked.
       First, whether it is necessary that this permission should accompany a work of witchcraft.
       Secondly, that God in His justice permits a creature naturally sinful to perpetrate witchcraft and
       other horrid crimes, the other two necessary concomitants being presupposed. Thirdly, that the
       crime of witchcraft exceeds all other evils which God permits to be done. Fourthly, in what way
       this matter should be preached to the people.
             Concerning the third postulate of this First Part, namely, the Divine permission, it is asked:
       Whether it is as Catholic to affirm the Divine permission in these works of witches, as it is quite
       heretical to contradict such an affirmation? And it is argued that it is not heretical to maintain that
       God does not permit so great power to the devil in this sort of witchcraft. For it is Catholic, and not
       heretical, to refute such things as appear to be to the disparagement of the Creator. And it is
       submitted that it is Catholic to maintain that the devil is not allowed such power of injuring men,
       since to hold the opposite opinion seems to be a disparagement of the Creator. For it would then
       follow that not everything is subject to the Divine providence, since the all-wise Provider keeps
       away, as far as possible, all defect and evil from those for whom He cares. And if the works of
       witchcraft are permitted by God, they are not kept away by Him: and if He does not keep them
       away, the God Himself is not a wise Provider, and all things are not subject to His providence. But
       since this is false, therefore it is false that God permits witchcraft.
             And again, to permit a thing to happen presupposes in him who permits it that either he can
       prevent it from happening if he wishes, or he cannot prevent it even if he wishes; and neither of
       these suppositions can apply to God. For in the first case, such a man would be thought spiteful,
       and in the second case impotent. Then it is incidentally asked: As to that bewitchment that
       happened to Peter, if God could have prevented it, and did not do so, then God is either despiteful
       or He does not care for all; but if He could not have prevented it even if He wished, the He is not
       omnipotent. But since it is not possible to maintain the opinion that God does not care for all, and
       the rest, therefore it cannot be said that witchcraft is done with the permission of God.
             Besides, he who is responsible to himself and is the master of his own actions is not subject to
       the permission or providence of any governor. But men were made responsible to themselves by
       God, according to Ecclesiasticus xv: God made man from the beginning, and left him in the hand
       of his counsel. In particular, the sins which men do are left in their own counsel, according to their
       hearts' desire. Therefore not all evils are subject to Divine permission.
             Yet again, S. Augustine says in the Enchiridion, as does also Aristotle in the ninth book of
       Metaphysics: It is better not to know certain vile things than to know them, but all that is good is to
       be ascribed to God. Therefore God does not prevent the very vile works of witchcraft, whether He


file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_12a.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:07 PM]
Part I, Question XII - P.1

       permits or not. See also S. Paul in I. Corinthians ix: Doth God take care of oxen? And the same
       holds good of the other irrational beasts. Wherefore God takes no care whether they are bewitched
       or not, since they are not subject to His permission, which proceeds from His providence.
             Again, that which happens of necessity has no need of provident permission or prudence.
       This is clearly shown in Aristotle's Ethics, Book II: Prudence is a right reasoning concerning
       things which happen and are subject to counsel and choice. But several effects of witchcraft
       happen of necessity; as when for some reason, or owing to the influence of stars, diseases come, or
       any other things which we judge to be witchcraft. Therefore they are not always subject to Divine
       permission.
             And again, if men are bewitched by Divine permission, then it is asked: Why does this
       happen to one more than to another? If it be said that it is because of sin, which abounds more in
       one than in another, this does not seem valid; for then the greater sinners would be the more
       bewitched, but this is manifestly not so, since they are less punished in this world. As it is said:
       Well is it for the liars. But, if this argument were good, they also would be bewitched. Finally, it is
       clear from the fact that innocent children and other just men suffer most from witchcraft.
             But against these arguments: it is submitted that God permits evil to be done, though He does
       not wish it; and this is for the perfecting of the universe. See Dionysius, de Diuin. Nom. III: Evil
       will be for all time, even to the perfecting of the universe. And S. Augustine in the Enchiridion: In
       all things good and evil consists the admirable beauty of the universe. So that what is said to be
       evil is well ordained, and kept in its due place commends more highly that which is good; for good
       things are more pleasing and laudable when compared with bad. S. Thomas also refutes the
       opinion of those who say that, although God has no wish for evil (since no creature seeks for evil,
       either in its natural, or its animal, or in its intellectual appetite, which is the will, whose object is
       good), yet He is willing that evil should exist and be done. This he says to be false; since God
       neither wishes evil to be done, nor wishes it not to be done, but is willing to allow evil to be done;
       and this is good for the perfecting of the universe.
             And why it is erroneous to say that God wishes evil to be and to be done, for the good of the
       universe, he says is for the following reason. Nothing is to be judged good except what is good in
       itself and not by accident. As the virtuous man is judge good in his intellectual nature, not in his
       animal nature. But evil is not of itself ordained for good, but by accident. For against the intention
       of those who do evil, good results. In this way, against the intention of witches, or against the
       intention of tyrants, was it that through their persecutions the patience of the martyrs shone out
       clearly.
             Answer. This question is as difficult to understand as it is profitable to elucidate. For there is
       among the arguments, not so much of Laymen as of certain Wise men, this in common; that they
       do not believe that such horrible witchcraft as had been spoken of is permitted by God; being
       ignorant of the causes of this Divine permission. And by reason of this ignorance, since witches
       are not put down with the vengeance that is due to them, they seem now to be depopulating the
       whole of Christianity. Therefore that both learned and unlearned may be satisfied in each way,
       according to the opinion of the Theologians, we make our answer by the discussion of two
       difficulties. And first, that he world is so subject to the Divine providence that He Himself
       provides for all. Secondly, that in His justice He permits the prevalence of sin, which consists of
       guilt, punishment, and loss, by reason of His two first permissions, namely, the fall of the Angels
       and that of our first parents. From which also it will be clear that obstinately to disbelieve this
       smacks of heresy, since such a man implicates himself in the errors of the infidels.
             And as for the first, it is to be noted that, presupposing that which pertains to the providence

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_12a.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:07 PM]
Part I, Question XII - P.1

       of God (see Wisdom xiv: Thy providence, O Father, governeth all things), we ought also to
       maintain that all things are subject to His providence, and that also He immediately provides for all
       things. And to make this clear, let us first refute a certain contrary error. For taking the text in Job
       xxii: Thick clouds are a covering to him that He seeth not us; and He walketh in the circuit of
       heaven: some have thought that the doctrine pf S. Thomas, I, 22, means that only incorruptible
       things are subject to Divine providence, such as the separate Essences, and the stars, with also the
       species of lower things, which are also incorruptible; but they said that the individuals of the
       species, being corruptible, were not so subject. Wherefore they said that all lower things which are
       in the world are subject to Divine providence in the universal, but not in the particular or
       individual sense. But to others this opinion did not seem tenable, since God cares for the other
       animals just as He does for men. Therefore the Rabbi Moses, wishing to hold a middle course,
       agreed with their opinion in saying that all corruptible things are not individually entirely subject
       to Divine governance, but only in a universal sense, as has been said before; but he excepted men
       from the generality of corruptible things, because of the splendid nature of their intellect, which is
       comparable with the of the separate Essences. And so, according to his opinion, whatever
       witchcraft happens to men comes from the Divine permission; but not such as happens to the
       animals or to the other fruits of the earth.
             Now though this opinion is nearer to the truth than that which altogether denies the
       providence of God in worldly matters, maintaining that the world was made by chance, as did
       Democritus and the Epicureans, yet it is not without great fallacy. For it must be said that
       everything is subject to Divine providence, not only in the general, but also in the particular sense;
       and that the bewitching not only of men, but also of animals and the fruits of the earth, comes from
       Divine and provident permission. And this is plainly true; the providence and ordinance of things
       to some end extend just so far as the causality of them itself extends. To take an example from
       things that are subject to some master; they are so far subject to his providence as they are
       themselves under his control. But the causality which is of God is the original agent, and extends
       itself to all beings, not only in a general but also in an individual sense, and not only to things
       incorruptible. Therefore, since all things must be of God, so all things are cared for by Him, that is,
       are ordained to some end.
             This point is touched by S. Paul in Romans xiii: All things which are from God were ordained
       by Him. Which is to say that, just as all things come from God, so also are all things ordained by
       Him, and are consequently subject to His providence. For the providence of God is to be
       understood as nothing else than the reason, that is, the cause of the ordering of things to a purpose.
       Therefore, in so far as all things are a part of one purpose, so also are they subject to the
       providence of God. And God knows all things, not only in the mass generally, but also in the
       individual particularly. Now the knowledge which God has of things created is to be compared
       with a craftsman's knowledge of his work: therefore, just as all his work is subject to the order and
       providence of a craftsman, so are all things subject to the order and providence of God.
             But this does not provide a satisfactory explanation of the fact that God in justice permits evil
       and witchcraft to be in the world, although He is Himself the provider and governor of all things;
       for it would seem that, if this is conceded, He ought to keep away all evil from those for whom He
       cares. For we see among men that a wise provider does all that he can to keep away all defect and
       harm from those who are his care; therefore why does not God, in the same way, keep away all
       evil? It must be noted that a particular and an universal controller or provider are two very
       different matters. For the particular controller must of necessity keep away all the harm he can,
       since he is not able to extract good out of evil. But God is the universal controller of the whole

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_12a.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:07 PM]
Part I, Question XII - P.1

       world, and can extract much good from particular evils; as through the persecution of the tyrants
       came the patience of the martyrs, and through the works of witches come the purgation or proving
       of the faith of the just, as will be shown. Therefore it is not God's purpose to prevent all evil, lest
       the universe should lack the cause of much good. Wherefore S. Augustine says in the Enchiridion:
       So merciful is Almighty God, that He would not allow any evil to be in His works unless He were
       so omnipotent and good that He can bring good even out of evil.
            And we have an example of this in the actions of natural things. For although the corruptions
       and defects which occur in natural things are contrary to the purpose of that particular thing (as
       when a thief is hanged, or when animals are killed for human food), they are yet in accordance
       with the universal purpose of nature (as that man's life and property should be kept intact); and
       thus the universal good is preserved. For it is necessary for the conservation of the species that the
       death of one should be the preservation of another. For lions are kept alive by the slaughter of
       other animals.
                                                   Page 1 of 2


                                              Question XII Continued . . . .

                                                           Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                         HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                 All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_12a.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:07 PM]
Part I, Question XII - P.2


                                     THE
                             MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                       PART I.
                                             QUESTION XII. CONTINUED . . . .

                                   It is explained with regard to the Divine Permission,
                             that God would not make a Creature to be Naturally without Sin.

            Secondly, God in His justice permits the prevalence of evil, both that of sin and that of pain,
       and especially now that the world is cooling and declining to its end; and this we shall prove from
       two propositions which must be postulated. First, that God would not - or let us rather say, with the
       fear of God, that (humanly speaking) it is impossible that any creature, man or Angel, can be of
       such a nature that it cannot sin. And secondly, that it is just in God to permit man to sin, or to be
       tempted. These two propositions being granted, and since it is a part of the Divine providence that
       every creature shall be left to its own nature, it must be said that, according to the premises, it is
       impossible that God does not permit witchcraft to be committed with the help of devils.
            And that it was not possible to communicate to a creature a natural incapacity for sin, is
       shown by S. Thomas (II, 23, art. 1). For if this quality were communicable to any creature, God
       would have communicated it; for He has, at least in kind, communicated all other graces and
       perfections to His creatures that are communicable. Such is the personal union of two natures in
       Christ, the Maternity and Virginity of Immaculate MARY, the blessed companionship of the elect,
       and many other things. But we read that this quality was not given to any creature, either man or
       Angel; for it is said: Even in His Angels He found sin. Therefore it is certain that God will not
       communicate to man a natural incapacity for sin, although man may win to this through grace.
            Again, if this were communicable, and were not communicated, the universe would not be
       perfect. And its perfections consists in the fact that all communicable good qualities of creatures
       are communicated in kind.
            Neither is it valid to argue that God, being omnipotent, and having made men and Angels in
       His likeness, could also have caused his creatures to be by nature impeccable: or even that He
       would make that condition of Grace, which is the cause of confirmation in goodness, an essential
       part of the nature of Angels and men, so that through their natural origin and natural condition they
       would be so confirmed in goodness that they would not be able to sin.
            For the first argument will not hold. Since, although God is all-powerful and all-good, yet he
       will not bestow this quality of impeccability; not because of any imperfection in His power, but
       because of the imperfection of the creature; and this imperfection lies chiefly in the fact that no
       creature, man or Angel, is capable of receiving this quality. And for this reason: that, being a
       creature, its being depends upon its Creator, just as an effect depends on the cause of its being.
       And to create is to make something out of nothing, and this, if left to itself, perishes, but endures
       so long as it preserves the influence of its cause. You may take, if you wish, an example from a
       candle, which burns only so long as it has wax. This being so, it is to be noted that God created
       man, and left him in the hand of his own counsel (Ecclesiasticus xvii). And so also He created the


file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_12b.html (1 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:03:07 PM]
Part I, Question XII - P.2

       Angels in the beginning of Creation. And this was done for the sake of Free-will, the property of
       which is to do or to omit doing, to recede or not to recede from its cause. And since to recede from
       God, from free-will, is to sin, therefore it was impossible for man or Angel to receive, and God did
       not will to give, such a natural quality that he should at the same time be endowed with free-will
       and also be incapable of sin.
             Another imperfection by reason of which this quality cannot be communicated to man or
       Angel is that it implies a contradiction; and since a contradiction is by its nature impossible, we
       say that God will not do this thing. Or rather we should say that His creatures cannot receive such
       a quality. For example, it is impossible that anything can be at one and the same time alive and
       dead. And so it would imply this contradiction: that a man should have free-will, by which he
       would be able to depart from his Creator, and that he should also be unable to sin. But if he were
       unable to sin, he would be unable to depart from his Creator. For this is sin: to despise the
       incommutable good and cleave to things that are variable. But to despise or not to despise is a
       matter of free-will.
             The second argument also is not valid. For if the confirmation of grace were so essential a
       part of the original creation that it became a natural quality of the creature to be unable to sin, then
       his inability to sin would arise, not from any exterior cause or from grace, but from his own very
       nature; and then he would be God, which is absurd. S. Thomas treats of this in his above solution
       of the last argument, when he says that whenever there happens to any creature something that can
       only be cause by a superior influence, the lower nature cannot itself cause that effect without the
       co-operation of the higher nature. For example, a gas becomes ignited by fire; but it could not of
       its own nature light itself without fire.
             I say, therefore, that since the confirmation of a rational creature comes only through grace,
       which is a sort of spiritual light or image of the light of Creation, it is impossible for any creature
       to have, of its own nature, that confirmation of grace, unless it be made one with the Divine nature;
       that is, unless it be of the same nature as God, which is altogether impossible. Let us conclude by
       saying that the inability to sin belongs by nature to God alone. For He does not depart from His
       nature, Who gives to all things their being, neither can He depart from the righteousness of His
       goodness; for this belongs to Him through the character of His nature. But for all others who have
       this quality that they cannot sin, it is conferred upon them through the confirmation in goodness by
       grace; by which the sons of God are made free from sin, and they who in any way consort with the
       Divine nature.
                                                    Page 2 of 2


                                                            Question XIII

                                                           Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                         HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                 All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_12b.html (2 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:03:07 PM]
Notes

           “Naturally without sin.” The theology here is very intricate and must be followed with the
        utmost caution. All have free-will, and therefore might sin. But Our Lord and Our Lady did not
        sin; and the thought that they might have sinned is blasphemy. And S. John says (I. iii. 9):
        “Whosoever is born of God, committeth not sin: for his seed abideth in him, and he cannot sin,
        because he is born of God.”




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0056.html [2002-01-20 12:03:07 PM]
Part I, Question XIII


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                              PART I.
                                                           QUESTION XIII.

  Herein is set forth the Question, concerning the Two Divine Permissions which God justly allows,
namely, that the Devil, the Author or all Evil, should Sin, and that our First Parents should Fall, from
                  which Origins the Works of Witches are justly suffered to take place.

             The second question and proposition is that God justly permitted certain Angels to sin in
       deed, which He could not have allowed unless they were capable of sin; and that in like manner He
       preserved certain creatures through grace, without their having previously suffered temptation; and
       that He justly allows man both to be tempted and to sin. And all this is clearly shown as follows.
       For it is a part of Divine providence that each single thing should be left to its own nature, and not
       be altogether impeded in its natural works. For, as Dionysius says (de Diuin. Nom., IV),
       Providence is not a destroyer, but a preserver of nature. This being so, it is manifest that, just as the
       good of the race is better than the good of the individual (Aristotle, Ethics, I), so also the good of
       the universe takes precedence over the good of any particular creature. Therefore we must add
       that, if men were prevented from sinning, many steps to perfection would be removed. For that
       nature would be removed which has it in its power to sin or not to sin; but it has already been
       shown that this is a natural property of man's nature.
             And let it be answered that, if there had been no sin, but immediate confirmation, then there
       would never have appeared what debt of grace in good works is due to God, and what the power of
       sin has been able to effect, and many other things without which the universe would suffer great
       loss. For it behoved that Satan should sin, not through some outside suggestion, but that he should
       find in himself the occasion of sin. And this he did when he wished to be equal to God. Now this is
       to be understood neither simply and directly, nor indirectly, but only with a reservation; and this is
       declared according to the authority of Esaias xiv: I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I
       will be like the Most High. For it must not be understood simply and directly, because in that case
       he would have had a limited and erring understanding, in seeking something which was impossible
       for him. For he knew that he was a creature created by God, and therefore he knew that it was
       impossible for him to become equal to his Creator. Neither, again, must it be understood
       indirectly; for since the whole transparence of the air consists in its subjection to the sun's rays;
       therefore nothing which would be contrary to the good of its nature could be sought for by an
       Angel. But he sought for equality with God, not absolutely, but with a reservation, which was as
       follows. The nature of God has two qualities, that of blessedness and goodness, and the fact that all
       the blessedness and goodness of His creatures issues from Him. Therefore the Angel, seeing that
       the dignity of his own nature transcended that of the other creatures, wished and asked that the
       blessedness and goodness of all the inferior creatures should be derived from him. And he sought
       this in his own natural capacity, that just as he was the first to be endowed in nature with those
       qualities, so the other creatures should receive them from the nobility of his nature. And he sought


file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_13a.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:08 PM]
Part I, Question XIII

       this of God, in perfect willingness to remain subject to God so long as he had that power granted to
       him. Therefore he did not wish to be made equal with God absolutely, but only with a reservation.
             It is further to be noted that, wishing to bring his desire to the point of action, he suddenly
       made it known to others; and the understanding of the other Angels of his desire, and their
       perverse consenting to it, was also sudden. Therefore the sin of the First Angel exceeded and
       preceded the sins of the others in respect of the magnitude of his guilt and causality, but not in
       respect of duration. See Apocalypse xii. The dragon falling from heaven drew with him the third
       part of the stars. And he lives in the form of Leviathan, and is king over all the children or pride.
       And, according to Aristotle (Metaph., V), he is called king of princes, inasmuch as he moves those
       who are subject to him according to his will and command. Therefore his sin was the occasion of
       sin in others, since he first, not having been tempted from outside, was the external temptation of
       others.
             And that all these things happened instantaneously may be exemplified by physical things; for
       the ignition of a gas, the sight of the flame, and the impression formed by that sight all happen at
       one and the same time.
             I have put this matter at some length; for in the consideration of that stupendous Divine
       permission in the case of the most noble creatures with regard to the one sin of ambition, it will be
       easier to admit particular permissions in the case of the works of witches, which are in some
       certain circumstances even greater sins. For in certain circumstances the sins of witches are greater
       than that of the Angel or of our first parents, as will be shown in the Second Part.
             Now the fact that the providence of God permitted the first man to be tempted and to sin is
       sufficiently clear from what has been said concerning the transgression of the Angels. For both
       man and the Angel were created to the same end, and left with free-will, in order that they might
       receive the reward of blessedness not without merit. Therefore, just as the Angel was not preserved
       from his fall, in order that the power of sin on the one side and the power of the confirmation of
       grace on the other side might work together for the glory of the universe, so also ought it to be
       considered in the case of man.
             Wherefore S. Thomas (II, 23, art. 2) says: That by which God is glorified ought not to be
       hindered from within. But God is glorified in sin, when He pardons in mercy and when He
       punishes in justice; therefore it behoves Him not to hinder sin. Let us, then, return to a brief
       recapitulation of our proposition, namely, that by the just providence of God man is permitted to
       sin for many reasons. First, that the power of God may be shown, Who alone is unchanging while
       every creature is variable. Secondly, that the wisdom of God may be declared, Who can bring
       good out of evil, which could not be unless God had allowed the creature to sin. Thirdly, that the
       mercy of God may be made manifest, by which Christ through His death liberated man who was
       lost. Fourthly, that the justice of God may be shown, which not only rewards the good, but also
       punishes the wicked. Fifthly, that the condition of man may not be worse than that of other
       creatures, all of whom God so governs that He allows them to act after their own nature; wherefore
       it behoved Him to leave man to his own judgement. Sixthly, for the glory of men; that is, the glory
       of the just man who could transgress but has not. And seventhly, for the adorning of the universe;
       for as there is a threefold evil in sin, namely, guilty, pain, and loss, so is the universe adorned by
       the corresponding threefold good, namely, righteousness, pleasure, and usefulness. For
       righteousness is adorned by guilt, pleasure by pain, and all usefullness by loss. And by this the
       answer to the arguments is made plain.

                                                         Solutions to the Arguments.

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_13a.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:08 PM]
Part I, Question XIII


             According to the first argument it is heretical to maintain that the devil is allowed power to
       injure men. But the opposite appears rather to be true; for it is heretical to assert that God does not
       permit man, of his own free-will, to sin when he wishes. And God permits much sin, by reason of
       His power to hurt men in the punishment of the wicked for the adorning of the universe. For it is
       said by S. Augustine in his Book of Soliloques: Thou, Lord, hast commanded, and it is so, that the
       shame of guilt should never be without the glory of punishment.
             And that is not a valid proof of the argument which is taken from the wise ruler who keeps
       away all defect and evil as far as he can. For it is quite different with God, Who has an universal
       care, from one who has only a particular care. For God, Whose care is universal, can bring good
       out of evil, as is shown by what has been said.
             For the second argument, it is clear that God's power as well as His goodness and justice are
       manifest in His permission of sin. So when it is argued that God either can or cannot prevent evil,
       the answer is that He can prevent it, but that for the reasons already shown it does not behove Him
       to do so.
             Neither is it valid to object that He therefore wishes evil to be; since He can prevent it but will
       not; for, as has been shown in the arguments for the truth, God cannot wish evil to be. He neither
       wishes nor does not wish it, but He permits it for the perfecting of the universe.
             In the third argument S. Augustine and Aristotle are quoted on the subject of human
       knowledge, saying that it is better for a man not to have knowledge of that which is evil and vile
       for two reasons: first, that then he will have less opportunity to think of evil, since we cannot
       understand many things at the same time. And secondly, because knowledge of evil sometimes
       perverts the will towards evil. But these arguments do not concern God, Who without and
       detriment understands all the deeds of men and of witches.
             For the fourth argument: S. Paul excepts the care of God from oxen, to show that a rational
       creature has through free-will command over its actions, as has been said. Therefore God has a
       special providence over him, that either blame or merit may be imputed to him, and he may
       receive either punishment or reward; but that God does not in this way care for the irrational
       beasts.
             But to argue from that authority that the individuals of irrational creation have no part in
       Divine providence would be heretical; for it would be to maintain that all things are not subject to
       Divine providence, and would be contrary to the praise which is spoken in Holy Scripture
       concerning the Divine wisdom, which stretches mightily from end to end and disposes all things
       well; and it would be the error of the Rabbi Moses as was shown in the arguments for the truth.
             For the fifth argument, man did not institute nature, but puts the works of nature to the
       greatest use known to his skill and strength. Therefore human providence does not extend to the
       inevitable phenomena of nature, as that the sun will rise to-morrow. But God's providence does
       extend to these things, since He is Himself the author of nature. Wherefore also defects in nature,
       even if they arise out of the natural course of things, are subject to Divine providence. And
       therefore Democritus and the other natural philosophers were in error when they ascribed whatever
       happened to the inferior creation to the mere chance of matter.
             For the last argument: although every punishment is inflicted by God for sin, yet the greatest
       sinners are not always afflicted with witchcraft. And this may be because the devil does not wish
       to afflict and tempt those whom he sees to belong to him by just title, or because he does not wish
       them to be turned back to God. As it is said: Their plagues were multiplied, and they turned them
       to God, etc. And that all punishment is inflicted by God for sin is shown by what follows; for


file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_13a.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:08 PM]
Part I, Question XIII

       according to S. Jerome: Whatever we suffer, we deserve for our sins.
            Now it is declared that the sins of witches are more grievous than those of the bad angels and
       our first parents. Wherefore, just as the innocent are punished for the sins of their fathers, so are
       many blameless people damned and bewitched for the sins of witches.
                                                  Page 1 of 1


                                                           Question XIV

                                                           Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_13a.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:08 PM]
Part I, Question XIV


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                              PART I.
                                                           QUESTION XIV.

  The Enormity of Witches is Considered, and it is shown that the Whole Matter should be rightly Set
                                       Forth and Declared.

             Concerning the enormity of crimes, it is asked whether the crimes of witches exceed, both in
       guilt, in pain, and in loss, all the evils which God allows and has permitted from the beginning of
       the world up till now. And it seems that they do not, especially as regards guilt. For the sin which a
       man commits when he could easily avoid it is greater than the sin which another man commits
       when he could not so easily avoid it. This is shown by S. Augustine, de Ciuit. Dei: There is great
       wickedness in sinning when it is so easy not to sin. But Adam, and others who have sinned when
       in a state of perfection or even of grace, could more easily because of the help of grace have
       avoided their sins — especially Adam who was created in grace — than many witches, who have
       not shared in such gifts. Therefore the sins of such are greater than all the crimes of witches.
             And again in respect of punishment: the greatest punishment is due to the greater blame. But
       Adam's sin was the most heavily punished, as is plainly proved by the fact that both his guilt and
       his punishment are shown in all his posterity by the inheritance of original sin. Therefore his sin is
       greater than all other sins.
             And again, the same is argued in respect of loss. For according to S. Augustine: A thing is
       evil in that it takes away from the good; therefore where there is the more good lost, there the
       greater evil has gone before. But the sin of our first parent brought the greatest loss both to nature
       and to grace, since it deprived us of innocence and immortality; and no subsequent sin has brought
       such loss, therefore, etc.
             But the contrary side: that which includes the most causes of evil is the greater evil, and such
       are the sins of witches. For they can, with God's permission, bring every evil upon that which is
       good by nature and in form, as is declared in the Papal Bull. Besides, Adam sinned only in doing
       that which was wrong in one of two ways; for it was forbidden, but was not wrong in itself: but
       witches and other sinners sin in doing that which is wrong in both ways, wrong in itself, and
       forbidden, such as murders and many other forbidden things. Therefore their sins are heavier than
       other sins.
             Besides, sin which comes from definite malice is heavier than sin which comes from
       ignorance. But witches, out of great malice, despise the Faith and the sacraments of the Faith, as
       many of them have confessed.
             Answer. The evils which are perpetrated by modern witches exceed all other sin which God
       has ever permitted to be done, as was said in the title of this Question. And this can be shown in
       three ways, in so far as they are sins involving perversity of character, though it is different with
       the sins that contravene the other Theological virtues. First in general, by comparing their works
       indifferently with any other worldly crimes. Secondly in particular, by considering the species of


file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_14a.html (1 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:09 PM]
Part I, Question XIV

       the superstition and into what pact they have entered with the devil. And thirdly, by comparing
       their sins with the sins of the bad Angels and even with that of our first parents.
             And first, sin is threefold, involving guilt, punishment, and loss. Good also is correspondingly
       threefold, involving righteousness, felicity, and use. And righteousness corresponds with the guilt,
       felicity with punishment, and use with loss.
             That the guilt of witches exceeds all other sins is apparent in this way. For according to the
       teaching of S. Thomas (II, 22, art. 2), there is in the matter of sin much that may be considered
       whereby the gravity or lightness of the sin may be deduced; and the same sin may be found heavy
       in one and light in another. For example, we can say that in fornication a young man sins, but an
       old man is mad. Yet those sins are, simply speaking, the heavier which are not only attended by
       the more extensive and more powerful circumstances, but are in their nature and quantity of a
       more essentially serious sort.
             And so we can say that, though the sin of Adam was in some respects heavier than all other
       sins, inasmuch as he fell to the instigation of a smaller temptation, since it came only from within;
       and also because he could more easily have resisted on account of the original justice in which he
       was created: nevertheless in the form and quantity of sin, and in other respects which aggravate the
       sin the more in that it is the cause of many yet heavier sins, the sins of witches exceed all other
       sins. And this will be made still clearer in two ways.
             For one sin is said to be greater than another in one or other of the following respects: in
       causality, as was the sin of Lucifer; in generality, as Adam's sin; in hideousness, as was the sin of
       Judas; in the difficulty of forgiving it, as is the sin against the Holy Ghost; in danger, as in the sin
       of covetousness; in inclination, as is the sin of the flesh; in the offending of the Divine Majesty, as
       is the sin of idolatry and infidelity; in the difficulty of combating it, as the sin of pride; in blindness
       of mind, as the sin of anger. Accordingly, after the sin of Lucifer, the works of witches exceed all
       other sins, in hideousness since they deny Him crucified, in inclination since the commit nastiness
       of the flesh with devils, in blindness of mind since in a pure spirit of malignity the rage and bring
       every injury upon the souls and bodies of men and beasts, as has been shown from what has been
       said before.
             And this, indeed, is indicated, according to S. Isidore, by the word. For they are called
       witches (maleficae) on account of the enormity of their crimes, as has been said above.
             Our contention is also deduced from the following. There are two gradations in sin, a turning
       away, and a change of heart. See our quotation from S. Augustine: Sin is to reject the
       incommutable good, and to cleave to things that are variable. And the turning away from God is as
       it were formal, just as the change of heart is as it were material. Therefore the more a man is
       separated from God by it, the heavier is the sin. And since infidelity is the chief cause of man's
       separation from God, the infidelity of witches stands out as the greatest of sins. And this is given
       the name of Heresy, which is Apostasy from the Faith; and in this witches sin throughout their
       whole lives.
             For the sin of infidelity consists in opposing the Faith; and this may come about in two ways,
       by opposing a faith which has not yet been received, or by opposing it after it has been received.
       Of the first sort is the infidelity of the Pagans or Gentiles. In the second way, the Christian Faith
       may be denied in two ways: either by denying the prophecies concerning it, or by denying the
       actual manifestation of its truth. And the first of these is the infidelity of the Jews, and the second
       the infidelity of Heretics.
             It is clear from this that the heresy of witches is the most heinous of the three degrees of
       infidelity; and this fact is proved both by reason and authority. For it is said in II. S. Peter ii: It has

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_14a.html (2 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:09 PM]
Part I, Question XIV

       been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than, after they have known it, to
       turn from it. And it is reasonable to suppose that, just as he who does not perform what he has
       promised commits a greater sin than he who does not perform what he never promised, so the
       infidelity of the heretics, who while professing the faith of the Gospel fight against it by corrupting
       it, is a greater sin than that of the Jews and Pagans.
              And again, the Jews sin more greatly than the Pagans; for they received the prophecy of the
       Christian Faith in the Old Law, which they corrupt through badly interpreting it, which is not the
       case with the Pagans. Therefore their infidelity is a greater sin than that of the Gentiles, who never
       received the Faith of the Gospel. But concerning Apostasy, S. Thomas says in the Second of the
       Second, question 12: Apostasy means a turning away from God and religion, and this may happen
       according to the different ways by which man is joined to God; that is, by faith, or by the
       subjection of the will to obedience, or by religion and Holy Orders. S. Raymund and Hostiensis
       say that Apostasy is a rash departure from the state of faith or obedience or Religion. Now if that
       which precedes is removed, that which follows from it is also removed; but the converse
       proposition is not true. Therefore Apostasy from the Faith is a greater sin than the other two forms
       of infidelity, since in its case a precedent Religion has been removed.
              But according to S. Raymund, a man is not to be judged an Apostate or deserter, however far
       and long he may have strayed, unless he shows by his subsequent life that he has not though of
       returning to the Faith. And this would be shown in the case of a cleric if he were to marry a wife,
       or commit some similar crime. In the same way it is an Apostasy of disobedience when a man
       wilfully spurns the teaching of the Church and the Bishops. And such a man must be convicted of
       his infamy, and be excommunicated.
              Now when we speak of the Apostasy of witches, we mean the Apostasy of perfidy; and this is
       so much the more heinous, in that it springs from a pact made with the enemy of the Faith and the
       way of salvation. For witches are bound to make this pact, which is exacted by that enemy either
       in part or wholly. For we Inquisitors have found some witches who have denied all the articles of
       Faith, and others who have denied only a certain number of them; but they are all bound to deny
       true and sacramental confession. And so, even the Apostasy of Julian does not seem to have been
       so great, although in other respects he did more harm against the Church; but we cannot speak of
       that here.
              But it may be incidentally objected that it is possible that they may keep the Faith in the
       thoughts of their hearts, which God alone, and not even any Angel, can see into; but do reverence
       and obedience to the devil only in outward form. The answer to this seems to be that there are two
       degrees of the Apostasy of perfidy. One consists in outward acts of infidelity, without the
       formation of any pact with the devil, as when one lives in the lands of the infidels and conforms
       his life to that of the Mohammedans. The other consists in a pact made with the devil by one who
       lives in Christian lands, In the first case, men who keep the Faith in their hearts but deny it in their
       outward acts, though they are not Apostates or Heretics, are guilty of deadly sin. For in this way
       Solomon showed reverence to the gods of his wives. And no one can be excused on the ground
       that he does this through fear; for S. Augustine says: It is better to die of hunger than to be fed by
       Idolaters. But however much witches may retain the Faith in their hearts while denying it with
       their lips, they are still to be judged Apostates, since they have made a treaty with death and a
       compact with hell. Wherefore S. Thomas (II, 4), speaking of such magic works, and of those who
       in any way seek help from devils, says: They are all Apostates from the Faith, by reason of a pact
       made with the Devil, either in word, when some invocation is used, or by some deed, even if there
       is no actual sacrifice. For no man can serve two masters.

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_14a.html (3 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:09 PM]
Part I, Question XIV

             To the same effect writes Blessed Albertus Magnus, where he asks whether the sin of
       Magicians and Astrologers is an Apostasy from the Faith. And he answers: In such there is always
       Apostasy either of word or of deed. For if any invocations are made, then there is an open pact
       made with the devil, and it is plainly Apostasy in word. But if their magic is simply a matter of
       action, then it is Apostasy in deed. And since in all these there is abuse of the Faith, seeing that
       they look for from the devil what they ought to look for from God, therefore they are always to be
       judged Apostates. See how clearly they set forth two degrees of Apostasy, understanding a third,
       namely, that of thought. And even if this last is lacking, yet witches are judged to be Apostates in
       word and deed. Therefore, as will be shown, they must be subject to the punishment of Heretics
       and Apostates.
             And there is in them a third enormity of crime, exceeding all other heresies. For S. Augustine
       (XXVIII, 1 and 2) tells us that the whole life of infidels is a sin; and the gloss on Romans xiv says
       that everything which comes not of faith is sin. What then is to be thought of the whole life of
       witches, that is, of all their other actions which are not pleasing to the devil, such as fasting,
       attending church, communicating, and other things? For in all these things they commit deadly sin,
       as is shown as follows. So far have they fallen in sin that, although they have not lost all power of
       amendment (since sin does not corrupt the whole good of their nature, and a natural light yet
       remains in them); yet, because of their homage given to the devil, and unless they be absolved
       from it, all their works, even when they appear to be good, are rather of an evil nature. And this is
       not seen to be the case with other infidels.
             For according to S. Thomas in the Second of the Second, question 10, Whether every action
       of an infidel is a sin; he says that the deeds of the unfaithful which are, of themselves, good, such
       as fasting, almsgiving, and deeds of that sort, are no merit to them because of their infidelity,
       which is a most grievous sin. Yet sin does not corrupt the whole good of their nature, and there
       remains in them a natural light. Therefore not ever deed of theirs is mortal sin, but only those
       which proceed from their very infidelity, or are related to it. For example, a Saracen fasts, to
       observe the law of Mohammed as to fasting, and a Jew observes his Feast days; but in such things
       he is guilty of mortal sin. And in this way is to be understood the above dictum of S. Augustine,
       that the whole life of infidels is sin.

                 That Witches Deserve the heaviest Punishment above All the Criminals of the World.
             The crimes of witches, then, exceed the sins of all others; and we now declare what
       punishment they deserve, whether as Heretics or as Apostates. Now Heretics, according to S.
       Raymund, are punished in various ways, as by excommunication, deposition, confiscation of their
       goods, and death. The reader can be fully informed concerning all these by consulting the law
       relating to the sentence of excommunication. Indeed even their followers, protectors, patrons and
       defenders incur the heaviest penalties. For, besides the punishment of excommunication inflicted
       upon them, Heretics, together with their patrons, protectors and defenders, and with their children
       to the second generation on the father's side, and to the first degree on the mother's side, are
       admitted to no benefit or office of the Church. And if a Heretic have Catholic children, for the
       heinousness of his crime they are deprived of their paternal inheritance. And if a man be convicted,
       and refuse to be converted and abjure his heresy, he must at once be burned, if he is a layman. For
       if they who counterfeit money are summarily put to death, how much more must they who
       counterfeit the Faith? But if he is a cleric, after solemn degradation he is handed over to the secular
       Court to be put to death. But if they return to the Faith, they are to be imprisoned for life. But in

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_14a.html (4 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:09 PM]
Part I, Question XIV

       practice they are treated more leniently after recantation than they should be according to the
       judgement of the Bishops and Inquisition, as will be shown in the Third Part, where the various
       methods of sentencing such are treated of; that is to say, those who are arrested and convicted and
       have recanted their error.
            But to punish witches in these ways does not seem sufficient, since they are not simple
       Heretics, but Apostates. More than this, in their very apostasy they do not deny the Faith for any
       fear of men or for any delight of the flesh, as has been said before; but, apart from their
       abnegation, even give homage to the very devils by offering them their bodies and souls. Is is clear
       enough from this that, however much they are penitent and return to the Faith, they must not be
       punished like other Heretics with lifelong imprisonment, but must be made to suffer the extreme
       penalty. And because of the temporal injury which they do to men and beasts in various ways, the
       laws demand this. Is is even equally culpable to learn as it is to teach such iniquities, say the laws
       concerning Soothsayers. Then how much more emphatically do they speak concerning witches,
       where they say that the penalty for them is the confiscation of their goods and decapitation. The
       laws also say much concerning those who by witchcraft provoke a woman to lust, or, conversely,
       cohabit with beasts. But these matters were touched upon on the First Question.
                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                            Question XV

                                                           Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                       HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                               All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_14a.html (5 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:09 PM]
Part I, Question XV


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                              PART I.
                                                            QUESTION XV.

 It is Shown that, on Account of the Sins of Witches, the Innocent are often Bewitched, yea, Sometimes
                                        even for their Own Sins.

             It is a fact that, by Divine permission, many innocent people suffer loss and are
       punished by the aforesaid plagues, not for their own sins, but for those of witches. And lest
       this should seem to any a paradox, S. Thomas shows in the Second of the Second, quest. 8,
       that this is just in God. For he divides the punishments of this life into three classes. First,
       one man belongs to another; therefore, if a man be punished in his possessions, it may be
       that another man suffers for this punishment. For, bodily speaking, sons are a property of the
       father, and slaves and animals are the property of their masters; and so the sons are
       sometimes punished for their parents. Thus the son born to David from adultery quickly
       died; and the animals of the Amalekites were bidden to be killed. Yet the reason for these
       things remains a mystery.
             Secondly, the sin of one may be passed on to another; and this in two ways. By
       imitation, as children imitate the sins of their parents, and slaves and dependents the sins of
       their masters, that they may sin more boldly. In this way the sons inherit ill-gotten gain, and
       slaves share in robberies and unjust feuds, in which they are often killed. And they who are
       subject to Governors sin the more boldly when they see them sin, even if they do not
       commit the same sins; wherefore they are justly punished.
             Also the sin of one is passed on to another in the way of desert, as when the sins of
       wicked subjects are passed on to a bad Governor, because the sins of the subjects deserve a
       bad Governor. See Job: He makes Hypocrites to reign on account of the sins of the people.
             Sin, and consequently punishment, can also be passed on through some consent or
       dissimulation. For when those in authority neglect to reprove sin, then very often the good
       are punished with the wicked, as S. Augustine says in the first book de Ciuitate Dei. An
       example was brought to our notice as Inquisitors. A town was once rendered almost
       destitute by the death of its citizens; and there was a rumour that a certain buried woman
       was gradually eating the shroud in which she had been buried, and that the plague could not
       cease until she had eaten the whole shroud and absorbed it into her stomach. A council was
       held, and the Podesta with the Governor of the city dug up the grave, and found half the
       shroud absorbed through the mouth and throat into the stomach, and consumed. In horror at
       this sight, the Podesta drew his sword and cut off her head and threw it out of the grave, and
       at once the plague ceased. Now the sins of that old woman were, by Divine permission,
       visited upon the innocent on account of the dissimulation of what had happened before. For
       when an Inquisition was held it was found that during a long time of her life she had been a
       Sorceress and Enchantress. Another example is the punishment of a pestilence because


file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_15a.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:10 PM]
Part I, Question XV

       David numbered the people.
             Thirdly, sin is passed on by Divine permission in commendation of the unity of human
       society, that one man should take care for another by refraining from sin; and also to make
       sin appear the more detestable, in that the sin of one redounds upon all, as though all were
       one body. An example is the sin of Achan in Joshua vii.
             We can add to these two other methods: that the wicked are punished sometimes by the
       good, and sometimes by other wicked men. For as Gratianus says (XXIII, 5), sometimes
       God punishes the wicked through those who are exercising their legitimate power at His
       command; and this in two ways: sometimes with merit on the part of the punishers, as when
       He punished the sins of the Canaanites through His people; sometimes with no merit on the
       part of the punishers, but even to their own punishment, as when He punished the tribe of
       Benjamin and destroyed it except for a few men. And sometimes He punishes by His
       nations being aroused, either by command or permission, but with no intention of obeying
       God, but rather greedy for their own gain, and therefore to their own damnation; as He now
       punished His people by the Turks, and did so more often by strange nations in the Old Law.
             But it must be noted that for whatever cause a man be punished, if he does not bear his
       pains patiently, then it becomes a scourge, not a correction, but only of vengeance, that is, of
       punishment. See Deuteronomy xxxii: A fire is kindled in min anger (that is, my punishment;
       for there is no other anger in God), and shall burn unto the lowest hell (that is, vengeance
       shall begin here and burn unto the last damnation, as S. Augustine explains), And there is
       further authority concerning punishment in his Fourth Distinction. But if men patiently bear
       their scourges, and are patient in the state of grace, they take the place of a correction, as S.
       Thomas says in his Fourth Book. And this is true even of one punished for committing
       witchcraft, or of a witch, to a greater or less degree according to the devotion of the sufferer
       and the quality of his crime.
             But the natural death of the body, being the last terror, is not a correction, since of its
       nature it partakes in the punishment for original sin. Nevertheless, according to Scotus,
       when it is awaited with resignation and devotion, and offered in its bitterness to God, it can
       in some way become a correction. But violent death, whether a man deserves it or not, is
       always a correction, if it is borne patiently and in grace. So much for punishments inflicted
       on account of the sins of others.
             But God also punishes men in this life for their own sins, especially in the matter of
       bewitchment. For see Tobias vii: The devil has power over those who follow their lusts. And
       this is clear from what we have already said concerning the member and the genital powers,
       which God chiefly allows to be bewitched.
             However, for the purpose of preaching to the public it is to be noted that,
       notwithstanding the aforesaid punishments which God inflicts on men for their own and
       others' sins, the preacher should keep as his basic principle and to the people this ruling of
       the law; which says, No one must be punished without guilt, unless there is some cause for
       doing so. And this ruling holds good in the Court of Heaven, that is, of God, just as it does
       in the human Courts of Justice, whether secular or ecclesiastic.
             The preacher may predicate this of the Court of Heaven. For the punishment of God is
       of two kinds, spiritual and temporal. In the former, punishment is never found without guilt.
       In the latter it is sometimes found quite without guilt, but not without cause. The first, or
       spiritual punishment, is of three kinds; the first being forfeiture of grace and a consequent
       hardening in sin, which is never inflicted except for the sufferer's own guilt. The second is

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_15a.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:10 PM]
Part I, Question XV

       the punishment of loss, that is, deprivation of glory, which is never inflicted without
       personal guilt in adults, or contracted guilt in children born from their parents' sin. The third
       is the punishment of pain, that is, the torture of hell fire, and is plainly due to guilt.
       Wherefore when it is said in Exodus xx: I am a jealous God, visiting the sins of the fathers
       upon the children unto the third and fourth generation: it is understood as speaking of the
       imitators of their fathers' crimes, as Gratian has explained, Book I, quest. 4; where he also
       gives other expositions.
             Now with regard to God's second, or temporal punishment: first, it may be, as has been
       said before, for the sin of another (but not without cause), or for personal guilt only, without
       any other's sin. But if you wish to know the causes for which God punishes, and even
       without any guilt of the sufferer or of another man, you may refer to the five methods which
       the Master expounds in Book IV, dist. 15, cap. 2. And you must take the three first causes,
       for the other two refer to personal guilt.
             For he says that for five causes God scourges man in this life, or inflicts punishment.
       First, that God may be glorified; and this is when some punishment or affliction is
       miraculously removed, as in the case of the man born blind (S. John ix), or of the raising of
       Lazarus (S. John xi).
             Secondly, if the first cause is absent, it is sent that merit may be acquired through the
       exercise of patience, and also that inner hidden virtue may be made manifest to others.
       Examples are Job i and Tobias ii.
             Thirdly that virtue may be preserved through the humiliation of castigation. S. Paul is
       an example, who says of himself in II. Corinthians xii: There was given unto me a thorn in
       my flesh, the messenger of Satan. And according to Remigius this thorn was the infirmity of
       carnal desire. These are the cause that are without guilt in the sufferer.
             Fourthly, that eternal damnation should begin in this life, that it might be in some way
       shown what will be suffered in hell. Examples are Herod (Acts xii) and Antiochus (II.
       Maccabees ix).
             Fifthly, that man may be purified, by the expulsion and obliteration of his guilt through
       scourges. Examples may be taken from Miriam, Aaron's sister, who was stricken with
       leprosy, and from the Israelites wandering in the wilderness, according to S. Jerome, XXIII,
       4. Or it may be for the correction of sin, as is exemplified by the case of David, who, after
       being pardoned for his adultery, was driven from his kingdom, as is shown in II. Kings, and
       is commented on by S. Gregory in his discourse on sin. It may, in fact, be said that every
       punishment that we suffer proceeds from our own sin, or at least from the original sin in
       which we were born, which is itself the cause of all causes.
             But as to the punishment of loss, meaning by that eternal damnation which they will
       suffer in the future, no one doubts that all the damned will be tortured with grevious pains.
       For just as grace is followed by the blessed vision of the Kingdom of Heaven, so is mortal
       sin followed by punishment in hell. And just as the degrees of blessedness in Heaven are
       measured in accordance with the degrees of charity and grace in life, so the degrees of
       punishment in hell are measured according to the degree of crime in this life. See
       Deuteronomy xxv: The measure of punishment will be according to the measure of sin. And
       this is so with all other sins, but applies especially to witches. See Hebrews x: Of how much
       sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who hath trodden underfoot the
       Son of God, and hath counted the blood of the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an
       unholy thing?

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_15a.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:10 PM]
Part I, Question XV

           And such are the sins of witches, who deny the Faith, and work many evil
       bewitchments through the most Holy Sacrament, as will be shown in the Second Part.
                                              Page 1 of 1


                                                           Question XVI

                                                           Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                       HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                               All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_15a.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:10 PM]
 Part I, Question XVI


                                  THE
                          MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                               PART I.
                                                            QUESTION XVI.

The Foregoing Truths are Set out in Particular, this by a Comparison of the Works of Witches with Other
                                         Baleful Superstitions.

              Now the foregoing truth concerning the enormity of witches' crimes is proved by
        comparing them with the other practices of Magicians and Diviners. For there are fourteen
        species of magic, springing from the three kinds of Divination. The first of these three is
        open invocation of devils. The second is no more than a silent consideration of the
        disposition and movement of some thing, as of the stars, or the days, or the hours, and such
        things. The third is the consideration of some human act for the purpose of finding out
        something that is hidden, and is called by the name of Sortilege.
              And the species of the first form of Divination, that is, an open invocation of devils, are
        the following: Sorcery, Oneiromancy, Necromancy, Oracles, Geomancy, Hydromancy,
        Aeromancy, Pyromancy, and Soothsaying (see S. Thomas, Second of the Second, quest. 95,
        26, and 5). The species of the second kind are Horoscopy, Haruspicy, Augury, Observation
        of Omens, Cheiromancy and Spatulamancy.
              The species of the third kind vary according to all those things which are classed as
        Sortilege for the finding out of something hidden, such as the consideration of pricks and
        straws, and figures in molten lead. And S. Thomas speaks also of these in the above-quoted
        reference.
              Now the sins of witches exceed all these crimes, as will be proved in respect of the
        foregoing species. There can then be no question concerning smaller crimes.
              For let us consider the first species, in which those who are skilled in sorcery and
        glamour deceive the human senses with certain apparitions, so that corporeal matter seems
        to become different to the sight and the touch, as was treated of above in the matter of the
        methods of creating illusions. Witches are not content with such practices in respect of the
        genital member, causing some prestidigitatory illusion of its disappearance (although this
        disappearance is not an actual fact); but they even frequently take away the generative
        power itself, so that a woman cannot conceive, and a man cannot perform the act even when
        he still retains his member. And without any illusion, they also cause abortion after
        conception, often accompanied with many other ills. And they even appear in various forms
        of beasts, as has been shown above.
              Necromancy is the summoning of and speech with the dead, as is shown by its
        etymology; for it is derived from the Greek word Nekros, meaning a corpse, and Manteia,
        meaning divination. And they accomplish this by working some spell over the blood of a
        man or some animal, knowing that the devil delights in such sin, and loves blood and the
        pouring out of blood. Wherefore, when they think that they call the dead from hell to answer


 file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_16a.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:10 PM]
Part I, Question XVI

       their questions, it is the devils in the likeness of the dead who appear and give such answers.
       And of this sort was the art of that great Pythoness spoken of in I. Kings xxviii, who raised
       up Samuel at the instance of Saul.
             But let no one think that such practices are lawful because the Scripture records that the
       soul of the just Prophet, summoned from Hades to predict the event of Saul's coming war,
       appeared through the means of a woman who was a witch. For, as S. Augustine says to
       Simplicianus: It is not absurd to believe that it was permitted by some dispensation, nto by
       the potency of any magic art, but by some hidden dispensation unknown to the Pythoness or
       to Saul, that the spirit of that just man should appear before the sight of the king, to deliver
       the Divine sentence against him. Or else it was not really the spirit of Samuel aroused from
       its rest, but some phantasm and imaginary illusion of devils caused by the machinations of
       the devil; and the Scripture calls that phantasm by the name of Samuel, just as the images of
       things are called by the names of the things they represent. This he says in his answer to the
       question whether divination by the invocation of devils is lawful. In the same Summa the
       reader will find the answer to the question whether there are degrees of prophecy among the
       Blessed; and he may refer to S. Augustine, XXVI, 5. But this has little to do with the deeds
       of witches, which retain in themselves no vestige of piety, as is apparent from a
       consideration of their works; for they do not cease to shed innocent blood, to bring hidden
       things to light under the guidance of devils, and by destroying the soul with the body spare
       neither the living nor the dead.
             Oneiromancy may be practised in two ways. The first is when a person uses dreams so
       that he may dip into the occult with the help of the revelation of devils invoked by him, with
       whom he has entered into an open pact. The second is when a man uses dreams for knowing
       the future, in so far as there is such virtue in dreams proceeding from Divine revelation,
       from a natural and instinsic or extrinsic cause; and such divination would not be unlawful.
       So says S. Thomas.
             And that preachers may have at least the nucleus of an understanding of this matter, we
       must first speak about the Angels. An Angel is of limited power, and can more effectively
       reveal the future when the mind is adapted to such revelations than when it is not. Now the
       mind is chiefly so adapted after the relaxation of exterior and interior movement, as when
       nights are silent and the fumes of motion are quieted; and these conditions are fulfilled
       round about the dawn, when digestion is completed. And I say this of us who are sinners, to
       whom the Angels in their Divine piety, and in the execution of their offices, reveal certain
       things, so that when we study at the time of the dawn we are given an understanding of
       certain occult matters in the Scriptures. For a good Angel presides over our understanding,
       just as God does over our will, and the stars over our bodies. But to certain more perfect
       men the Angel can at any hour reveal things, whether they are awake or asleep. However,
       according to Aristotle, de Somno et Uigilia, such men are more apt to receive revelations at
       one time than at another; and this is the casein all matters of magic.
             Secondly, it is to be noted that is happens through Nature's care for and regulation of
       the body, that certain future events have their natural cause in a man's dreams. And then
       those dreams or visions are not cause, as was said in the case of Angels, but only signs of
       that which is coming to a man in the future, such as health or sickness or danger. And this is
       the opinion of Aristotle. For in the dreams of the spirit Nature images the disposition of the
       heart, by which sickness or some other thing naturally comes to a man in the future. For is a


file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_16a.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:10 PM]
Part I, Question XVI

       man dreams of fires, it is a sign of a choleric disposition; if of flying or some such thing, it is
       a sign of a sanguine disposition; if he dreams of water or some other liquid, it is a sign of a
       phlegmatic, and if he dreams of terrene matters, it is a sign of a melancholy disposition. And
       therefore doctors are very often helped by dreams in their diagnosis (as Aristotle says in the
       same book).
             But these are slight matters in comparison with the unholy dreams of witches. For
       when they do not wish, as has been mentioned above, to be bodily transferred to a place, but
       desire to see what their fellow-witches are doing, it is their practice to lie down on their left
       side in the name of their own and of all devils; and these things are revealed to their vision
       in images. And if they seek to know some secret, either for themselves of for others, they
       learn it in dreams from the devil, by reason of an open, not a tacit, pact entered into with
       him. And this pact, again, is not a symbolical one, accomplished by the sacrifice of some
       animal, or some act of sacrilege, or by embracing the worship of some strange cult; but it is
       an actual offering of themselves, body and soul, to the devil, by a sacrilegiously uttered and
       inwardly purposed abnegation of the Faith. And not content with this, they even kill, or offer
       to devils, their own and others' children.
             Another species of divination is practised by Pythons, so called from Pythian Apollo,
       who is said to have been the originator of this kind of divination, according to S. Isidore.
       This is not effected by dreams or by converse with the dead, but by means of living men, as
       in the case of those who are lashed into a frenzy by the devil, either willingly or unwillingly,
       only for the purpose of foretelling the future, and not for the perpetration of any other
       monstrosities. Of this sort was the girl mentioned in Acts xvi, who cried after the Apostles
       that they were the servants of the true God; and S. Paul, being angered by this, commanded
       the spirit to come out of her. But it is clear that there is no comparison between such things
       and the deeds of witches, who, according to S. Isidore, are so called for the magnitude of
       their sins and the enormity of their crimes.
             Wherefore, for the sake of brevity, there is no need to continue this argument in respect
       of the minor forms of divination, since it has been proved in respect of the major forms. For
       the preacher may, if he wishes, apply these arguments to the other forms of divination: to
       Geomancy, which is concerned with terrene matters, such as iron or polished stone;
       Hydromancy, which deals with water and crystals; Aeromancy, which is concerned with the
       air; Pyromancy, which is concerned with fire; Soothsaying, which has to do with the entrails
       of animals sacrificed on the devil's altars. For although all these are done by means of open
       invocation of devils, they cannot be compared with the crimes of witches, since they are not
       directly purposed for the harming of men or animals or the fruits of the earth, but only for
       the foreknowledge of the future. The other species of divination, which are performed with a
       tacit, but not an open, invocation of devils, are Horoscopy, or Astrology, so called from the
       consideration of the stars at birth; Haruspicy, which observes the days and hours; Augury,
       which observes the behaviour and cries of birds; Omens, which observe the words of men;
       and Cheiromancy, which observes the lines of the hand, or of the paws of animals. Andone
       who wishes may refer to the teaching of Nider, and he will find mush as to when such things
       are lawful and when they are not. But the works of witches are never lawful.
                                                   Page 1 of 1




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_16a.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:10 PM]
Part I, Question XVI

                                                           Question XVII

                                                           Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                       HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                               All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_16a.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:10 PM]
Notes

           “Represent.” For a full discussion of the appearance of Samuel at Endor, see my “History of
        Witchcraft,” c.v.: “The Witch in Holy Writ,” pp. 176-81.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0057.html [2002-01-20 12:03:10 PM]
Part I, Question XVII


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                              PART I.
                                                           QUESTION XVII.

A Comparison of their Crimes under Fourteen Heads, with the Sins of the Devils of all and every Kind.

             So heinous are the crimes of witches that they even exceed the sins and the fall of the
       bad Angels; and if this is true as to their guilt, how should it not also be true of their
       punishments in hell? And it is not difficult to prove this by various arguments with regard to
       their guilt. And first, although the sin of Satan is unpardonable, this is not on account of the
       greatness of his crime, having regard to the nature of the Angels, with particular attention to
       the opinion of those who say that the Angels were created only in a state of nature, and
       never in a state of grace. And since the good of grace exceeds the good of nature, therefore
       the sins of those who fall from a state of grace, as do the witches by denying the faith which
       they received in baptism, exceed the sins of the Angels. And even if we say that the Angels
       were created, but not confirmed, in grace; so also witches, though they are not created in
       grace, have yet of their own will fallen from grace; just as Satan sinned of his own will.
             Secondly, it is granted that Satan's sin is unpardonable for various other reasons. For S.
       Augustine saus that he sinned at the instigation of none, therefore his sin is justly remediable
       by none. And S. John Damascene says that he sinned in his understanding against the
       character of God; and that his sin was the greater by reason of the nobility of his
       understanding. For the servant who knows the will of his master, etc. The same authority
       says that, since Satan is incapable of repentance, therefore he is incapable of pardon; and
       this is due to his very nature, which, being spiritual, could only be changed once, when he
       changed it for ever; but this is not so with men, in whom the flesh is always warring against
       the spirit. Or because he sinned in the high places of heaven, whereas man sins in the earth.
             But notwithstanding all this, his sin is in many respects small in comparison with the
       crimes of witches. First, as S. Anselm showed in one of his Sermons, he sinned in his pride
       while there was yet no punishment for sin. But witches continue to sin after great
       punishments have been often inflicted upon many other witches, and after the punishments
       which the Church teaches them have been inflicted by reason of the devil and his fall; and
       they make light of all these, and hasten to commit, not the least deadly of sins, as do other
       sinners who sin through infirmity or wickedness yet not from habitual malice, but rather the
       most horrible crimes from the deep malice of their hearts.
             Secondly, although the Bad Angel fell from innocence to guilt, and thence to misery
       and punishment; yet he fell from innocence once only, in such a way that he was never
       restored. But the sinner who is restored to innocence by baptism, and again falls from it,
       falls very deep. And this is especially true of witches, as is proved by their crimes.
             Thirdly, he sinned against the Creator; but we, and especially witches, sin against the
       Creator and the Redeemer.


file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_17a.html (1 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:03:11 PM]
Part I, Question XVII

            Fourthly, he forsook God, who permitted him to sin but accorded him no pity; whereas
       we, and witches above all, withdraw ourselves from God by our sins, while, in spite of his
       permission of our sins, He continually pities us and prevents us with His countless benefits.
            Fifthly, when he sinned, God rejected him without showing him and grace; whereas we
       wretches run into sin although God is continually calling us back.
            Sixthly, he keeps his heart hardened against a punisher; but we against a merciful
       persuader. Both sin against God; but he against a commanding God, and we against One
       who dies for us, Whom, as we have said, wicked witches offend above all.


                        The Solutions of the Arguments again Declare the Truth by Comparison.


             To the arguments. The answer to the first is clear from what was said in the beginning
       of this whole question. It was submitted that one sin ought to be thought heavier than
       another; and that the sins of witches are heavier than all others in respect of guilt, but not in
       respect of the penalties that they entail. To this it must be said that the punishment of Adam,
       just as his guilt, may be considered two ways; either as touching him personally, or as
       touching the whole of nature, that is, the posterity whcih came after him. As to the first,
       greater sins have been committed after Adam; for he sinned only in doing that which was
       evil, not in itself, but because it was forbidden. Therefore such sins deserve the heavier
       punishment.
             As to the second, it is true that the greatest punishment resulted from the first sin; but
       this is only indirectly true, in that through Adam all posterity was infected with original sin,
       and he was the first father of all those for whom the Only Son of God was able to atone by
       the power which was ordained. Moreover, Adam in his own person, with the mediation of
       Divine grace, repented, and was afterwards saved through the Sacrifice of Christ. But the
       sins of witches are incomparably greater, since they are not content with their own sins and
       perdition, but ever draw countless others after them.
             And thirdly, it follows from what has been said that it was by accident that Adam's sin
       involved the greater injury. For he found nature uncorrupted, and it was inevitable, and not
       of his own will, that he left it defiled; therefore it does not follow that his sin was
       intrinsically greater than others. And again, posterity would have committed the same sin if
       it had found nature in the same state. Similarly, he who has not found grace does not commit
       so deadly a sin as he who has found it and lost it. This is the solution of S. Thomas (II, 21,
       art. 2), in his solution of the second argument. And if anyone wishes fully to understand this
       solution, he must consider that even if Adam had kept his original innocence, he would not
       have passed it down to all posterity; for, as S. Anselm says, anyone coming after him could
       still have sinned. See also S. Thomas, dist. 20, where he considers whether new-born
       children would have been confirmed in grace; and in dist. 101, whether men who are now
       saved would have been saved if Adam had not sinned.
                                                    Page 1 of 1




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_17a.html (2 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:03:11 PM]
Part I, Question XVII

                                                          Question XVIII

                                                           Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_17a.html (3 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:03:11 PM]
Notes

            “S. Anselm.” Doctor of the Church; Archbishop of Canterbury, born at Aosta, a Burgundian
        town in the borders of Lombardy, 1033-34; died 21 April, 1109. High praise is given him in the
        Breviary Office for his Feast, 21 April, Second Nocturn of Matins, Lection VI: “Obdormiuit in
        Domino, famam non solum miraculorum et sanctitatis (praecipue ob insignem deuotionem erga
        Domini nostri passionem, et beatam Uirginem eius Matrem) assecutus, sed etiam doctrinae, quam
        ad defensionem Christianae religionis, animarum profectum, et omnium theologorum, qui sacras
        litteras scholastica methodo tradiderunt, normam coelitus hausisse ex eius omnibus apparet.”
        There are several collections of the works of S. Anselm, but of these few, if any, can claim to be
        critical, and none are adapted for modern requirements. At the same time there are very numerous
        separate editions, and even translations of the more important treatises, in particular the “Cur
        Deus Homo.”




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0058.html [2002-01-20 12:03:11 PM]
Part I, Question XVIII


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                             PART I.
                                                          QUESTION XVIII.

Here follows the Method of Preaching against and Controverting Five Arguments of Laymen and Lewd
Folk, which seem to be Variously Approved, that God does not Allow so Great Power to the Devil and
            Witches as is involved in the Performance of such Mighty Works of Witchcraft

             Finally, let the preacher br armed against certain arguments of laymen, and even of
       some learned men, who deny, up to a certain point, that there are witches. For, although they
       conceded the malice and power of the devil to inflict such evils at his will, they deny that the
       Divine permission is granted to him, and will not admit that God allows such things to be
       done. And although they have no method in their argument, groping blindly now this way
       and now that, it is yet necessary to reduce their assertions to five arguments, from which all
       their cavillings proceed. And the first is, that God does not permit the devil to rage against
       men wish such great power.
             The question put is whether the Divine permission must always accompany an
       infliction caused by the devil through a witch. And give arguments are submitted to prove
       that God does not permit it, and that therefore there is no witchcraft in the world. And the
       first argument is taken from God; the second from the devil; the third from the witch; the
       fourth from the affliction ascribed to witchcraft; and the fifth from the preachers and judges,
       on the assumption that they have so preached against and punished witches that they would
       have no security in life.
             And first as follows: God can punish men for their sins, and He punishes with the
       sword, famine, and pestilence; as well as with various and countless other infirmities to
       which human nature is subject. Wherefore, there being no need for Him to add further
       punishments, He does not permit witchcraft.
             Secondly, if that which is said of the devil were true, namely, that he can obstruct the
       generative forces so that a woman cannot conceive, or that if she does conceive, he can
       cause an abortion; or, if there is no abortion, he can cause the children to be killed after
       birth; in that case he would be able to destroy the whole world; and it could also be said that
       the devil's works were stronger than God's, since the Sacrament of matrimony is a work of
       God.
             Thirdly, they argue from man himself, that if there were any witchcraft in the world,
       then some men would be more bewitched than others; and that it is a false argument to say
       that men are bewitched for a punishment of their sins, and therefore false to maintain that
       there is witchcraft in the world. And they prove that it is false by arguing that, if it were true,
       then the greater sinners would receive the greater punishment, and that this is not the case;
       for sinners are less punished sometimes than the just, as is seen in the case of innocent
       children who are alleged to be bewitched.


file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_18a.html (1 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:12 PM]
Part I, Question XVIII

             Their fourth argument can be added to that which they adduce concerning God;
       namely, that a thing which a man can prevent and does not prevent, but allows it to be done,
       may be judged to proceed from his will. But since God is All-Good, He cannot wish evil,
       and therefore cannot permit evil to be done which He is able to prevent.
             Again, taking their argument from the infliction itself, which is alleged to be due to
       witchcraft; they submit that they are similar to natural infirmities and defects, and may
       therefore by cause by a natural defect. For it may happen through some natural defect that a
       man becomes lame, or blind, or loses his reason, or even dies; wherefore such things cannot
       confidently be ascribed to witches.
             Lastly, they argue that preachers and judges have preached and practised against
       witches in such a way that, if there were witches, their lives would never be safe from them
       on account of the great hatred that witches would have for them.
             But the contrary arguments may be taken from the First Question, where it treats of the
       third postulate of the First Part; and those points may be propounded to the people which are
       most fitting. How God permits evil to be, even though He does not wish it; but He permits it
       for the wonderful perfecting of the universe, which may be considered in the fact that good
       things are more highly commendable, are more pleasing and laudable, when they are
       compared with bad things; and authority can be quoted in support of this. Also that the depth
       of God's Divine wisdom, justice, and goodness should be shown forth, whereas it would
       otherwise remain hidden.
             For a brief settlement of this question there are various treatises available on this
       subject for the information of the people, to the effect, namely, that God justly permitted
       two Falls, that of the Angels and that of our first parents; and since these were the greatest of
       all falls, it is no matter for wonder if other smaller ones are permitted. But it is in their
       consequences that those two Falls were the greatest, not in their circumstances, in which last
       respect, as was shown in the last Question, the sins of witches exceed those of the bad
       angels and our first parents. In the same place it is shown how God justly permitted those
       first Falls, and anyone is at liberty to collect and enlarge upon what is there said as much as
       he wishes.
             But we must answer their arguments. As to the first, that God punishes quite enough by
       means of natural diseases, and by sword and famine, we make a threefold answer. First, that
       God did not limit His power to the processes of nature, or even to the influences of the stars,
       in such a way that He cannot go beyond those limits; for He has often exceeded them in the
       punishment of sins, by sending plagues and other afflictions beyond all the influence of that
       stars; as when He punished the sin of pride in David, when he numbered the people, by
       sending a pestilence upon the people.
             Secondly, it agrees with the Divine wisdom that He should so govern all things that He
       allows them to act at their own instigation. Consequently, it is not His purpose to prevent
       altogether the malice of the devil, but rather to permit it as far as He sees it to be for the
       ultimate good of the universe; although it is true that the devil is continually held in check
       by the good Angels, so that he may not do all the harm that he wishes. Similarly He does not
       propose to restrain the human sins which are possible to man through his free-will, such as
       the abnegation of the Faith, and the devotion of himself to the devil, which things are in the
       power of the human will. From these two premisses it follows that, when God is most
       offended, He justly permits those evils which are chiefly sought for by witches, and for
       which they deny the Faith, up to the extent of the devil's power; and such is the ability to

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_18a.html (2 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:12 PM]
Part I, Question XVIII

       injure men, animals, and the fruits of the earth.
              Thirdly, God justly permits those evils which indirectly cause the greatest uneasiness
       and torment to the devil; and of such a sort are those evils which are done by witches
       through the power of devils. For the devil is indirectly tormented very greatly when he sees
       that, against his will, God uses all evil for the glory of His name, for the commendation of
       the Faith, for the purgation of the elect, and for the acquisition of merit. For it is certain that
       nothing can be more galling to the pride of the devil, which he always rears up against God
       (as it is said: The pride of them that hate Thee increases ever), than that God should convert
       his evil machinations to His own glory. Therefore God justly permits all these things.
              Their second argument has been answered before; but there are two points in it which
       must be answered in detail. In the first place, far from its being true that the devil, or his
       works, as stronger than God, it is apparent that his power is small, since he can do nothing
       without the Divine permission. Therefore it may be said that the devil's power is small in
       comparison with the Divine permission, although it is very great in comparison with earthly
       powers, which it naturally excels, as is shown in the often quoted text in Job xi: There is no
       power on earth to be compared with him.
              In the second place, we must answer the question with God permits witchcraft to affect
       the generative powers more than any other human function. This has been dealt with above,
       under the title, How witches can obstruct the generative powers and the venereal act. For it
       is on account of the shamefulness of that act, and because the original sin due to the guilt of
       our first parents is inherited by means of that act. It is symbolized also by the serpent, who
       was the first instrument of the devil.
              To their third we answer that the devil has more intention and desire to tempt the good
       than the wicked; although he does in fact tempt the wicked more than the good, for the
       reason that the wicked have more aptitude than the good to respond to his temptation. In the
       same way, he is more eager to injure the good than the bad, but he finds it easier to injure
       the wicked. And the reason for this is, according to S. Gregory, that the more often a man
       gives way to the devil, the harder he makes it for himself to struggle against him. But since
       it is the wicked who most often give way to the devil, their temptations are the hardest and
       most frequent, as they have not the shield of Faith with which to protect themselves.
       Concerning this shield S. Paul speaks in Ephesians vi. Above all, taking the shield of faith,
       wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. But on the other hand,
       he assails the good more bitterly than the wicked. And the reason for this is that he already
       possesses the wicked, but not the good; and therefore he tried the harder to draw into his
       power through tribulation the just, who are not his, than the wicked, who are already his. In
       the same way, an earthly prince more severely chastises those who disobey his laws, or
       injure his kingdom, that those who do not set themselves against him.
              In answer to their fourth argument, in addition to what has already been written on this
       subject, the preacher can expound the truth that God permits evil to be done, but does not
       wish it to be done, by the five signs of the Divine will, which are Precept, Prohibition,
       Advice, Operation, and Permission. See S. Thomas, especially in his First Part, quest. 19,
       art. 12, where this is very plainly set forth. For although there is only one will in God, which
       is God Himself, just as His Essence is One; yet in respect of its fulfilment, His will is shown
       and signified to us in many ways, as the Psalm says: The mighty works of the Lord are
       fulfilled in all His wishes. Wherefore there is a distinction between the actual essential Will
       of God and its visible effects; even as the will, properly so called, is the will of a man's good

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_18a.html (3 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:12 PM]
Part I, Question XVIII

       pleasure, but in a metaphorical sense it is the will expressed by outward signs. For it is by
       signs and metaphors that we are shown that God wishes this to be.
             We may take an example from a human father who, while he has only one will in
       himself, expresses that will in five ways, either by his own agency, or through that of
       someone else. Through his own agency he expresses it in two ways, either directly or
       indirectly. Directly, when he himself does a thing; and then it is Operation. Indirectly, when
       he does not hinder someone else from acting (see Aritotle's Physics, IV: Prohibition is
       indirect causation), and this is called the sign of Permission. And the human father signifies
       his will through the agency of someone else in three ways. Either he orders someone to do
       something, or conversely forbids something; and these are the signs of Precept and
       Prohibition. Or he persuades and advises someone to do something; and this is the sign of
       Advice. And just as the human will is manifested in these five ways, so is God's will. For
       that God's will is shown by Precept, Prohibition, and Advice is seen in S. Matthew vi: Thy
       will be done in earth as it is in heaven: that is to say, may we on earth fulfil His Precepts,
       avoid His Prohibitions, and follow His Advice. And in the same way, S. Augustine shows
       that Permission and Operation are signs of God's will, where he says in the Enchiridion:
       Nothing is done unless Almighty God wishes it to be done, either by permitting it or by
       Himself doing it.
             To return to the argument; it is perfectly true that when a man can prevent a thing, and
       does not, that thing may be said to proceed from his will. And the inference that God, being
       All-Good, cannot wish evil to be done, is also true in respect of the actual Good Pleasure of
       God's Will, and also in respect of four of the signs of His Will; for it is needless to say that
       He cannot operate evil, or command evil to be done, or fail to be opposed to evil, or advise
       evil; but He can, however, permit evil to be done.
             And if it is asked how it is possible to distinguish whether an illness is caused by
       witchcraft or by some natural physical defect, we answer that there are various methods.
       And the first is by means of the judgement of doctors. See the words of S. Augustine On the
       Christian Doctrine: To this class of superstition belong all charms and amulets suspended or
       bound about the person, which the School of Medicine despises. For example, doctors may
       perceive from the circumstances, such as the patient's age, healthy complexion, and the
       reaction of his eyes, that his disease does not result from any defect of the blood or the
       stomach, or any other infirmity; and they therefore judge that it is not due to any natural
       defect, but to some extrinsic cause. And since that extrinsic cause cannot be any poisonous
       infection, which would be accompanied by ill humours in the blood and stomach, they have
       sufficient reason to judge that it is due to witchcraft.
             And secondly, when the disease is incurable, so that the patient can be relieved by no
       drugs, but rather seems to be aggravated by them.
             Thirdly, the evil may come so suddenly upon a man that it can only be ascribed to
       witchcraft. An example of how this happened to one man has been made known to us. A
       certain well-born citizen of Spires had a wife who was of such an obstinate disposition that,
       though he tried to please her in every way, yet she refused in nearly every way to comply
       with his wishes, and was always plaguing him with abusive taunts. It happened that, on
       going into his house one day, and his wife railing against him as usual with opprobrious
       words, he wished to go out of the house to escape from quarrelling. But she quickly ran
       before him and locked the door by which he wished to go out; and loudly swore that, unless
       he beat her, there was no honesty or faithfulness in him. At these heavy words he stretched

file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_18a.html (4 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:12 PM]
Part I, Question XVIII

       out his hand, not intending to hurt her, and struck her lightly with his open palm on the
       buttock; whereupon he suddenly fell to the ground and lost all his senses, and lay in bed for
       many weeks afflicted with a most grievous illness. Now it is obvious that this was not a
       natural illness, but was caused by some witchcraft of the woman. And very many similar
       cases have happened, and been made known to many.
              There are some who can distinguish such illnesses by means of a certain practice,
       which is as follows. They hold molten lead over the sick man, and pour it into a bowl of
       water. And if the lead condenses into some image, they judge that the sickness is due to
       witchcraft. And when such men are asked whether the image so formed is caused by the
       work of devils, or is due to some natural cause, they answer that it is due to the power of
       Saturn over lead, the influence of that planet being in other respects evil, and that the sun
       has a similar power over gold. But what should be thought of this practice, and whether it is
       lawful or not, will be discussed in the Second Part of this treatise. For the Canonists say that
       it is lawful that vanity may be confounded by vanity; but the Theologians hold a directly
       opposite view, saying that it is not right to do evil that good may come.
              In their last argument they advance several objections. First, why do not witches
       become rich? Secondly, why, having the favour of princes, do they not co-operate for the
       destruction of all their enemies? Thirdly, why are they unable to injure Preachers and others
       who persecute them?
              For the first, it is to be said that witches are not generally rich for this reason: that the
       devils like to show their contempt for the Creator by buying witches for the lowest possible
       price. And also, lest they should be conspicuous by their riches.
              Secondly, they do not injure princes because they wish to retain, as far as possible,
       their friendship. And if it is asked why they do not hurt their enemies, it is answered that a
       good Angel, working on the other side, prevents such witchcraft. Compare the passage in
       Daniel: The Prince of the Persians withstood me for twenty-one days. See S. Thomas in the
       Second Book of Sentences, where he debates whether there is any contest among the good
       Angels, and of what sort.
              Thirdly, it is said that they cannot injure Inquisitors and other officials, because they
       dispense public justice. Many examples could be adduced to prove this, but time does not
       permit it.
                                                       Page 1 of 1


                                                             Second Part

                                                           Main Index


                                                       Part I, Question XVIII
                                               was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                         HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                 All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/mm01_18a.html (5 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:12 PM]
Notes

           “Daniel” x, 13: “But the prince of the kingdom of the Persians resisted me for one-and-twenty
        days: And behold Michael, one of the chief princes, came to help me, and I remained there by the
        King of the Persians.” The Prince of the Persians is the angel guardian of Persia: who, according
        to his office, seeking the spiritual good of the Persians, was desirous that many of the Jews should
        remain among them.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_I/notes/n0059.html [2002-01-20 12:03:12 PM]
The Second Part


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                             THE SECOND PART
    TREATING ON THE METHODS BY WHICH THE WORKS OF
WITCHCRAFT ARE WROUGHT AND DIRECTED, AND HOW THEY MAY
       BE SUCCESSFULLY ANNULLED AND DISSOLVED
                    Resolved in but two Questions, yet these are divided into many Chapters.
                                                            QUESTION I

Question I                                              Of those against whom the Power of Witches availeth not at all.


Chapter I                                      Of the several Methods by which Devils through Witches Entice and
                                               Allure the Innocent to the Increase of that Horrid Craft and
                                               Company.


Chapter II                                                            Of the Way whereby a Formal Pact with Evil is made.


Chapter III                                                                  How they are Transported from Place to Place.


Chapter IV                                        Here follows the Way whereby Witches copulate with those Devils
                                                  known as Incubi.


Chapter V                                    Witches commonly perform their Spells through the Sacraments of the
                                             Church. And how they Impair the Powers of Generation, and how they
                                             may Cause other Ills to happen to God's Creatures of all kinds. But
                                             herein we except the Question of the Influence of the Stars.


Chapter VI                                                  How Witches Impede and Prevent the Power of Procreation.


Chapter VII                                                       How, as it were, they Deprive Man of his Virile Member.



file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02_toc.html (1 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:03:13 PM]
The Second Part

Chapter VIII                                      Of the Manner whereby they Change Men into the Shapes of
                                                  Beasts.


Chapter IX                              How Devils may enter the Human Body and the Head without doing any
                                        Hurt, when they cause such Metamorphosis by Means of Prestidigitation.


Chapter X                                    Of the Method by which Devils through the Operations of Witches
                                             sometimes actually possess men.


Chapter XI                                      Of the Method by which they can Inflict Every Sort of Infirmity,
                                                generally Ills of the Graver Kind.


Chapter XII                                   Of the Way how in Particular they Afflict Men with Other Like
                                              Infirmities.


Chapter XIII                                    How Witch Midwives commit most Horrid Crimes when they either
                                                Kill Children or Offer them to Devils in most Accursed Wise.


Chapter XIV                                                   Here followeth how Witches Injure Cattle in Various Ways.


Chapter XV                                    How they Raise and Stir up Hailstorms and Tempests, and Cause
                                              Lightning to Blast both Men and Beasts.


Chapter XVI                                  Of Three Ways in which Men and Women may be Discovered to be
                                             Addicted to Witchcraft: Divided into Three Heads: and First of the
                                             Witchcraft of Archers.


                                                            QUESTION II

Question II                                           The Methods of Destroying and Curing Witchcraft
                                                      Introduction, wherein is Set Forth the Difficulty of this Question.


Chapter I                                     The Remedies prescribed by the Holy Church against Incubus and
                                              Succubus Devils.



file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02_toc.html (2 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:03:13 PM]
The Second Part

Chapter II                                    Remedies prescribed for Those who are Bewitched by the Limitation of
                                              the Generative Power.


Chapter III                               Remedies prescribed for those who are Bewitched by being Inflamed
                                          with Inordinate Love or Extraordinary Hatred.


Chapter IV                               Remedies presribed for those who by Prestidigitative Art have lost their
                                         Virile Members or have seemingly been Transformed into the Shapes of
                                         Beasts.


Chapter V                                     Prescribed Remedies for those who are Obsessed owing to some Spell.


Chapter VI                                   Prescribed Remedies; to wit, the Lawful Exorcisms of the Church, for
                                             all Sorts of Infirmities and Ills due to Witchcraft; and the Method of
                                             Exorcising those who are Bewitched.


Chapter VII                                  Remedies prescribed against Hailstorms, and for animals that are
                                             Bewitched.


Chapter VIII                                  Certain Remedies prescribed against those Dark and Horrid Harms
                                              with which Devils may Afflict Men.


                                                   Main Index


                                          "The Malleus Maleficarum" was transcribed by
                                               Wicasta Lovelace and Christie Rice.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02_toc.html (3 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:03:13 PM]
Part II, Question I - P.1


                                    THE
                            MALLEUS MALEFICARUM

        THE SECOND PART, TREATING OF THE METHODS BY WHICH
            WITCHCRAFT IS INFLICTED, AND HOW IT MAY BE
                     AUSPICIOUSLY REMOVED.
                  RESOLVED IN TWO ONLY QUESTIONS, BUT DIVIDED INTO MANY CHAPTERS.

                                                                PART II.
                                                              QUESTION I.
                            Of those against whom the Power of Witches availeth not at all.

             The second main part of this work deals with the method of procedure adopted by witches for
       the performance of their witchcraft; and these are distinguished under eighteen heads, proceeding
       from two chief difficulties. The first of these two, dealt with in the beginning, concerns protective
       remedies, by which a man is rendered immune from witchcraft: the second, dealt with at the end,
       concerns curative remedies, by which those who are bewitched can be cured. For, as Aristotle says
       (Physics, IV), prevention and cure are related to one another, and are, accidentally, matters of
       causation. In this way the whole foundation of this horrible heresy may be made clear.
             In the above two divisions, the following points will be principally emphasized. First, the
       initiation of witches, and their profession of sacrilege. Second, the progress of their method of
       working, and of their horrible observances. Third, the preventive protections against their
       witchcrafts. And because we are now dealing with matters relating to morals and behaviour, and
       there is no need for a variety of arguments and disquisitions, since those matters which now follow
       under their headings are sufficiently discussed in the foregoing Questions; therefore we pray God
       that the reader will not look for proofs in every case, since it is enough to adduce examples that
       have been personally seen or heard, or are accepted at the word of credible witnesses.
             In the first of the points mentioned, two matters will be chiefly examined: first, the various
       methods of enticement adopted by the devil himself; second, the various ways in which witches
       profess their heresy. And in the second of the main points, six matters will be examined in order,
       relating to the procedure of witchcraft, and its cure. First, the practices of witches with regard to
       themselves and their own bodies. Second, their practices with regard to other men. Third, those
       relating to beasts. Fourth, the mischief they do to the fruits of the earth. Fifth, those kinds of
       witchcraft which are practised by men only and not by women. Sixth, the question of removing
       witchcraft, and how those who are bewitched may be cured. The First Question, therefore, is
       divided into eighteen heads, since in so many ways are their observances varied and multiplied.
             It is asked whether a man can be so blessed by the good Angels that he cannot be bewitched
       by witches in any of the ways that follow. And it seems that he cannot, for it has already been
       proved that even the blameless and innocent and the just are often afflicted by devils, as was Job;
       and many innocent children, as well as countless other just men, are seen to be bewitched,
       although not to the same extent as sinners; for they are not afflicted in the perdition of their souls,

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a00a.html (1 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:14 PM]
Part II, Question I - P.1

       but only in their worldly goods and their bodies. But the contrary is indicated by the confessions of
       witches, namely, that they cannot injure everybody, but only those whom they learn, through the
       information of devils, to be destitute of Divine help.
             Answer. There are three classes of men blessed by God, whom that detestable race cannot
       injure with their witchcraft. And the first are those who administer public justice against them, or
       prosecute them in any public official capacity. The second are those who, according to the
       traditional and holy rites of the Church, make lawful use of the power and virtue which the Church
       by her exorcisms furnishes in the aspersion of Holy Water, the taking of consecrated salt, the
       carrying of blessed candles on the Day of the Purification of Our Lady, of palm leaves upon Palm
       Sunday, and men who thus fortify themselves are acting so that the powers of devils are
       diminished; and of these we shall speak later. The third class are those who, in various and infinite
       ways, are blessed by the Holy Angels.
             The reason for this in the first class will be given and proved by various examples. For since,
       as S. Paul says, all power if from God, and a sword for the avenging of the wicked and the
       retribution of the good, it is no wonder that devils are kept at bay when justice is being done to
       avenge that horrible crime.
             To the same effect the Doctors note that there are five ways in which the devil's power is
       hindered, either wholly or in part. First, by a limit fixed by God to his power, as is seen in Job i
       and ii. Another example is the case of the man we read of in the Formicarius of Nider, who had
       confessed to a judge that he had invoked the devil in order that he might kill an enemy of his, or do
       him bodily harm, or strike him dead with lightning. And he said: “When I had invoked the devil
       that I might commit such a deed with his help, he answered me that he was unable to do any of
       those things, because the man had good faith and diligently defended himself with the sign of the
       cross; and that therefore he could not harm him in his body, but the most he could do was to
       destroy an eleventh part of the fruit of his lands.”
             Secondly, it is hindered by the application of some exterior force, as in the case of Balaam's
       ass, Numbers xxii. Thirdly, by some externally performed miracle of power. And there are some
       who are blessed with an unique privilege, as will be shown later in the case of the third class of
       men who cannot be bewitched. Fourthly, by the good providence of God, Who disposes each thing
       severally, and causes a good Angel to stand in the devil's way, as when Asmodeus killed the seven
       husbands of the virgin Sara, but did not kill Tobias.
             Fifthly, it is sometimes due to the caution of the devil himself, for at times he does not wish to
       do hurt, in order that worse may follow from it. As, for example, when he could molest the
       excommunicated but does not do so, as in the case of the excommunicated Corinthian (I.
       Corinthians v), in order that he may weaken the faith of the Church in the power of such
       banishment. Therefore we may similarly say that, even if the administrators of public justice were
       not protected by Divine power, yet the devils often of their own accord withdraw their support and
       guardianship from witches, either because they fear their conversion, or because they desire and
       hasten their damnation.
             This fact is proved also by actual experience. For the aforesaid Doctor affirms that witches
       have borne witness that it is a fact of their own experience that, merely because they have been
       taken by officials of public justice, they have immediately lost all their power of witchcraft. For
       example, a judge named Peter, whom we have mentioned before, wished his officials to arrest a
       certain witch called Stadlin; but their hands were seized with so great a trembling, and such a
       nauseous stench came into their nostrils, that they gave up hope of daring to touch the witch. And


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a00a.html (2 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:14 PM]
Part II, Question I - P.1

       the judge commanded them, saying: “You may safely arrest the wretch, for when he is touched by
       the hand of public justice, he will lose all the power of his iniquity.” And so the event proved; for
       he was taken and burned for many witchcrafts perpetrated by him, which are mentioned here and
       there in this work in their appropriate places.
             And many more such experiences have happened to us Inquisitors in the exercise of our
       inquisitorial office, which would turn the mind of the reader to wonder if it were expedient to
       relate them. But since self-praise is sordid and mean, it is better to pass them over in silence than
       to incur the stigma of boastfulness and conceit. But we must except those which have become so
       well known that they cannot be concealed.
             Not long ago in the town of Ratisbon the magistrates had condemned a witch to be burned,
       and were asked why it was that we Inquisitors were not afflicted like other men with witchcraft.
       They answered that witches had often tried to injure them, but could not. And, being asked the
       reason for this, they answered that they did not know, unless it was because the devils had warned
       them against doing so. For, they said, it would be impossible to tell how many times they have
       pestered us by day and by night, now in the form of apes, not of dogs or goats, disturbing us with
       their cries and insults; fetching us from our beds at their blasphemous prayers, so that we have
       stood outside the window of their prison, which was so high that no one could reach it without the
       longest of ladders; and then they have seemed to stick the pins with which their head-cloth was
       fastened violently into their heads. But praise be to Almighty God, Who in His pity, and for no
       merit of our own, has preserved us as unworthy public servants of the justice of the Faith.
             The reason in the case of the second class of men is self-evident. For the exorcisms of the
       Church are for this very purpose, and are entirely efficacious remedies for preserving oneself from
       the injuries of witches.
             But if it is asked in what manner a man ought to use such protections, we must speak first of
       those that are used without the uttering of sacred words, and then of the actual sacred invocations.
       For in the first place it is lawful in any decent habitation of men or beasts to sprinkle Holy Water
       for the safety and securing of men and beasts, with the invocation of the Most Holy Trinity and a
       Paternoster. For it is said in the Office of Exorcism, that wherever it is sprinkled, all uncleanness is
       purified, all harm is repelled, and no pestilent spirit can abide there, etc. For the Lord saves both
       man and beast, according to the Prophet, each in his degree.
             Secondly, just as the first must necessarily be sprinkled, so in the case of a Blessed Candle,
       although it is more appropriate to light it, the wax of it may with advantage be sprinkled about
       dwelling-houses. And thirdly, it is expedient to place or to burn consecrated herbs in those rooms
       where they can best be consumed in some convenient place.
             Now it happened in the city of Spires, in the same year that this book was begun, that a
       certain devout woman held conversation with a suspected witch, and, after the manner of women,
       they used abusive words to each other. But in the night she wished to put her little suckling child
       in its cradle, and remembered her encounter that day with the suspected witch. So, fearing some
       danger to the child, she placed consecrated herbs under it, sprinkled it with Holy Water, put a little
       Blessed Salt to its lips, signed it with the Sign of the Cross, and diligently secured the cradle.
       About the middle of the night she heard the child crying, and, as women do, wished to embrace the
       child, and life the cradle on to her bed. She lifted the candle, indeed, but could not embrace the
       child, because he was not there. The poor woman, in terror, and bitterly weeping for the loss of her
       child, lit a light, and found the child in a corner under a chair, crying but unhurt.
             In this it may be seen what virtue there is in the exorcisms of the Church against the snares of
       the devil. It is manifest that Almighty God, in His mercy and wisdom which extend from end to

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a00a.html (3 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:14 PM]
Part II, Question I - P.1

       end, watches over the deeds of those wicked men; and that he gently directs the witchcraft of
       devils, so that when they try to diminish and weaken the Faith, they on the contrary strengthen it
       and make it more firmly rooted in the hearts of many. For the faithful may derive much profit from
       these evils; when, by reason of devils' works, the faith is made strong, God's mercy is seen, and
       His power manifested, and men are led into His keeping and to the reverence of Christ's Passion,
       and are enlightened by the ceremonies of the Church.
             There lived in a town of Wiesenthal a certain Mayor who was bewitched with the most
       terrible pains and bodily contortions; and he discovered, not by means of other witches, but from
       his own experience, how that witchcraft had been practised on him. For he said he was in the habit
       of fortifying himself every Sunday with Blessed Salt and Holy Water, but that he had neglected to
       do so on one occasion owing to the celebration of somebody's marriage; and on that same day he
       was bewitched.
             In Ratisbon a man was being tempted by the devil in the form of a woman to copulate, and
       became greatly disturbed when the devil would not desist. But it came into the poor man's mind
       that he ought to defend himself by taking Blessed Salt, as he had heard in a sermon. So, he took
       some Blessed Salt on entering the bath-room; and the woman looked fiercely at him, and, cursing
       whatever devil had taught him to do this, suddenly disappeared. For the devil can, with God's
       permission, present himself either in the form of a witch, or by possessing the body of an actual
       witch.
             There were also three companions walking along a road, and two of them were struck by
       lightning. The third was terrified, when he heard voices speaking in the air, “Let us strike him
       too.” But another voice answered, “We cannot, for to-day he has heard the words ‘The Word was
       made Flesh.’” And he understood that he had been saved because he had that day heard Mass, and,
       at the end of the Mass, the Gospel of S. John: In the beginning was the Word, etc.
             Also sacred words bound to the body are marvellously protective, if seven conditions for their
       use are observed. But these will be mentioned in the last Question of this Second Part, where we
       speak of curative, as here we speak of preventive measures. And those sacred words help not only
       to protect, but also to cure those who are bewitched.
             But the surest protection for places, men, or animals are the words of the triumphal title of our
       Saviour, if they be written in four places in the form of a cross: IESUS † NAZARENUS † REX †
       IUDAEORUM †. There may also be added the name of MARY and of the Evangelists, or the
       words of S. John: The Word was made Flesh.
             But the third class of men which cannot be hurt by witches is the most remarkable; for they
       are protected by a special Angelic guardianship, both within and without. Within, by the inpouring
       of grace; without, by the virtue of the stars, that is, by the protection of the Powers which move the
       stars. And this class is divided into two sections of the Elect: for some are protected against all
       sorts of witchcrafts, so that they can be hurt in no way; and others are particularly rendered chaste
       by the good Angels with regard to the generative functions, just as evil spirits by their witchcrafts
       inflame the lusts of certain wicked men towards one woman, while they make them cold towards
       another.
             And their interior and exterior protection, by grace and by the influence of the stars, is
       explained as follows. For though it is God Himself Who pours grace into our souls, and no other
       creature has so great power as to do this (as it is said: The Lord will give grace and glory); yet,
       when God wished to bestow some especial grace, He does so in a dispositive way through the
       agency of a good Angel, as S. Thomas teaches us in a certain place in the Third Book of Sentences.


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a00a.html (4 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:14 PM]
Part II, Question I - P.1



                                                                 Page 1 of 2


                                                Question I Continued . . . .

                                                      Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                            HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                    All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a00a.html (5 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:14 PM]
Notes

            “Stadlin.” Stadelein, who is described as “grandis maleficus,” “a most notorious warlock,”
        lived at Boltingen, a town in the duchy and diocese of Lausanne. John Nider sat as assessor as his
        trial. See the “Formicarius,” c. III.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2001.html [2002-01-20 12:03:14 PM]
Part II, Question I - P.2


                                    THE
                            MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                       PART II.
                                               QUESTION I. CONTINUED . . . .

             And this is the doctrine put forward by Dionysius in the fourth chapter de Diuinus
       Nominibus: This is the fixed and unalterable law of Divinity, that the High proceeds to the Low
       through a Medium; so that whenever of good emanates to us from the fountain of all goodness,
       comes through the ministry of the good Angels. And this is proved both by examples and by
       argument. For although only the Divine power was the cause of the Conception of the Word of
       God in the Most Blessed Virgin, through whom God was made man; yet the mind of the Virgin
       was by the ministry of an Angel much stimulated by the Salutation, and by the strengthening and
       information of her understanding, and was thus predisposed to goodness. This truth can also be
       reasoned as follows: It is the opinion of the above-mentioned Doctor that there are three properties
       of man, the will, the understanding, and the inner and outer powers belonging to the bodily
       members and organs. The first God alone can influence: For the heart of the king is in the hand of
       the Lord. A good Angel can influence the understanding towards a clearer knowledge of the true
       and the good, so that in the second of his properties both God and a good Angel can enlighten a
       man. Similarly in the third, a good Angel can endow a man with good qualities, and a bad Angel
       can, with God's permission, afflict him with evil temptations. However, it is in the power of the
       human will either to accept such evil influences or to reject them; and this a man can always do by
       invoking the grace of God.
             As to the exterior protection which comes from God through the Movers of the stars, the
       tradition is widespread, and conforms equally with the Sacred Writings and with natural
       philosophy. For all the heavenly bodies are moved by angelic powers which are called by Christ
       the Movers of the stars, and by the Church the Powers of the heavens; and consequently all the
       corporeal substances of this world are governed by the celestial influences, as witness Aristotle,
       Metaphysics I. Therefore we can say that the providence of God overlooks each on of His elect,
       but He subjects some of them to the ills of this life for their correction, while He so protects others
       that they can in no way be injured. And this gift they receive either from the good Angels deputed
       by God for their protection, or from the influence of the heavenly bodies or the Powers which
       move them.
             It is further to be noted that some are protected against all witchcrafts, and some against only
       a part of them. For some are particularly purified by the good Angels in their genital functions, so
       that witches can in no way bewitch them in respect of those functions. But it is in one sense
       superfluous to write of these, although in another sense it is needful for this reason: for those who
       are bewitched in their generative functions are so deprived of the guardianship of Angels that they
       are either in mortal sin always, or practise those impurities with too lustful a zest. In this
       connexion it has been shown in the First Part of this work that God permits greater powers of
       witchcraft against that function, not so much because of its nastiness, as because it was this act that
       caused the corruption of our first parents and, by its contagion, brought the inheritance of original


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a00b.html (1 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:15 PM]
Part II, Question I - P.2

       sin upon the whole human race.
             But let us give a few examples of how a good Angel sometimes blesses just and holy men,
       especially in the matter of the genital instincts. For the following was the experience of the Abbot
       S. Serenus, as it is told by Cassian in his Collations of the Fathers, in the first conference of the
       Abbot Serenus. This man, he says, laboured to achieve an inward chastity of heart and soul, by
       prayers both by night and day, by fasting and by vigils, till he at last perceived that, by Divine
       grace, he had extinguished all the surgings of carnal concupiscence. Finally, stirred by an even
       greater zeal for chastity, he used all the above holy practices to pray the Almighty and All-Good
       God to grant him that, by God's gift, the chastity which he felt in his heart should be visibly
       conferred upon his body. Then an Angel of the Lord came to him in a vision in the night, and
       seemed to open his belly and take from his entrails a burning tumour of flesh, and then to replace
       all his intestines as they had been; and said: Lo! the provocation of your flesh is cut out, and know
       that this day you have obtained perpetual purity of your body, according to the prayer which you
       prayed, so that you will never again be pricked with that natural desire which is aroused even in
       babes and sucklings.
             Similarly S. Gregory, in the first book of his Dialogues, tells of the Blessed Abbot Equitius.
       This man, he says, was in his youth greatly troubled by the provocation of the flesh; but the very
       distress of his temptation made him all the more zealous in his application to prayer. And when he
       continuously prayed Almighty God for a remedy against this affliction, an Angel appeared to him
       one night and seemed to make him an eunuch, and it seemed to him in his vision that all feeling
       was taken away from his genital organs; and from that time he was such a stranger to temptation as
       if he had no sex in his body. Behold what benefit there was in that purification; for he was so filled
       with virtue that, with the help of Almighty God, just as he was before pre-eminent among, so he
       afterwards became pre-eminent over women.
             Again, in the Lives of the Fathers collected by that very holy man S. Heraclides, in the book
       which he calls Paradise, he tells of a certain holy Father, a monk named Helias. This man was
       moved by pity to collect thirty women in a monastery, and began to rule over them. But after two
       years, when he was thirty years old, he fled from the temptation of the flesh into a hermitage, and
       fasting there for two days, prayed to God, saying: “O Lord God, either slay me, or deliver me from
       this temptation.” And in the evening a dream came to him, and he saw three Angels approach him;
       and they asked him why he had fled from that monastery of virgins. But when he did not dare to
       answer, for shame, the Angels said: If you are set free from temptation, will you return to your
       cure of those women? And he answered that he would willingly. They then extracted an oath to
       that effect from him, and made him an eunuch. For one seemed to hold his hands, another his feet,
       and the third to cut out his testicles with a knife; though this was not really so, but only seemed to
       be. And when they asked if he felt himself remedied, he answered that he was entirely delivered.
       So, on the fifth day, he returned to the sorrowing women, and ruled over them for the forty years
       that he continued to live, and never again felt a spark of that first temptation.
             No less a benefit do we read to have been conferred upon the Blessed Thomas, a Doctor of
       our Order, whom his brothers imprisoned for entering that Order; and, wishing to tempt him, they
       sent in to him a seductive and sumptuously adorned harlot. But when the Doctor had looked at her,
       he ran to the material fire, and snatching up a lighted torch, drove the engine of the fire of lust out
       of his person; and, prostrating himself in a prayer for the gift of chastity, went to sleep. Two
       Angels then appeared to him, saying: Behold, at the bidding of God we gird you with a girdle of
       chastity, which cannot be loosed by any other such temptation; neither can it be acquired by the


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a00b.html (2 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:15 PM]
Part II, Question I - P.2

       merits of human virtue, but is given as a gift by God alone. And he felt himself girded, and was
       aware of the touch of the girdle, and cried out and awaked. And thereafter he felt himself endowed
       with so great a gift of chastity, that from that time he abhorred all the delights of the flesh, so that
       he could not even speak to a woman except under compulsion, but was strong in his perfect
       chastity. This we take from the Formicarius of Nider.
             With the exception, therefore, of these three classes of men, no one is secure from witches.
       For all others are liable to be bewitched, or to be tempted and incited by some witchery, in the
       eighteen ways that are now to be considered. For we must first describe these methods in their
       order, that we may afterwards discuss more clearly the remedies by which those who are
       bewitched can be relieved. And that the eighteen methods may be more clearly shown, they are set
       forth under as many chapters as follows. First, we show the various methods of initiation of
       witches, and how they entice innocent girls to swell the numbers of their perfidious company.
       Second, how witches profess their sacrilege, and the oath of allegiance to the devil which they
       take. Third, how they are transported from place to place, either bodily or in the spirit. Fourth, how
       they subject themselves to Incubi, who are devils. Fifth, their general method of practising
       witchcraft through the Sacraments of the Church, and in particular how, with the permission of
       God, they can afflict all creatures except the Celestial Bodies. Sixth, their method of obstructing
       the generative function. Seventh, how they can take off the virile member by some art of illusion.
       Eighth, how they change men into the shapes of beasts. Ninth, how devils can enter the mind
       without hurting it, when they work some glamour or illusion. Tenth, how devils, through the
       operation of witches, sometimes substantially inhabit men. Eleventh, how they cause every sort of
       infirmity, and this in general. Twelfth, of certain infirmities in particular. Thirteenth, how witch
       midwives cause the greatest damage, either killing children or sacrilegiously offering them to
       devils. Fourteenth, how they cause various plagues to afflict animals. Fifteenth, how they raise
       hailstorms and tempests, and thunder and lightning, to fall upon men and animals. Sixteenth,
       seventeenth, and eighteenth, the three ways in which men only, and not women, are addicted to
       witchcraft. After these will follow the question of the methods by which these sorts of witchcraft
       may be removed.
             But let no one think that, because we have enumerated the various methods by which various
       forms of witchcraft are inflicted, he will arrive at a complete knowledge of these practices; for
       such knowledge would be of little use, and might even be harmful. Not even the forbidden books
       of Necromancy contain such knowledge; for witchcraft is not taught in books, nor is it practised by
       the learned, but by the altogether uneducated; having only one foundation, without the
       acknowledgement or practice of which it is impossible for anyone to work witchcraft as a witch.
             Moreover, the methods are enumerated here at the beginning, that their deeds may not seem
       incredible, as they have often been though hitherto, to the great damage of the Faith, and the
       increase of witches themselves. But if anyone maintains that, since (as has been proved above)
       some men are protected by the influence of the stars so that they can be hurt by no witchcraft, it
       should also be attributed to the stars when anyone is bewitched, as if it were a matter of
       predestination whether a man can be immune from or subject to witchcraft, such a man does not
       rightly understand the meaning of the Doctors; and this in various respects.
             And first, because there are three human qualities which may be said to be ruled by three
       celestial causes, namely, the act of volition, the act of understanding, and bodily acts. And the first,
       as has been said, is governed directly and only by God; the second by an Angel; and the third is
       governed, but not compelled, by a celestial body.
             Secondly, it is clear from what has been said that choice and volition are governed directly by

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a00b.html (3 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:15 PM]
Part II, Question I - P.2

       God, as S. Paul says: It is God Who causeth us to will and to perform, according to His good
       pleasure: and the understanding of the human intellect is ordered by God through the mediation of
       the Angels. Accordingly also all things corporeal, whether they be interior as are the powers and
       knowledge acquired through the inner bodily functions, or exterior as are sickness and health, are
       dispensed by the celestial bodies, through the mediation of Angels. And when Dionysius, in the
       fourth chapter de Diuinis Nominibus, says that the celestial bodies are the cause of that which
       happens in this world, this is to be understood as to natural health and sickness. But the sicknesses
       we are considering are supernatural, since they are inflicted by the power of the devil, with God's
       permission. Therefore we cannot say that it is due to the influence of the stars that a man is
       bewitched; although it can truly be said that it is due to the influence of the stars that some men
       cannot be bewitched.
             But if it is objected that these two opposite effects must spring from the same cause, and that
       the pendulum must swing both ways, it is answered that, when a man is preserved by the influence
       of the stars from these supernatural ills, this is not due directly to the influence of the stars, but to
       an angelic power, which can strengthen that influence so that the enemy with his malice cannot
       prevail against it; and that angelic power can be passed on through the virtue of the stars. For a
       man may be at the point of death, having reached the natural term of life, and God in His power,
       which in such matters always works indirectly, may alter this be sending some power of
       preservation instead of the natural defect in the man and in his dominating influence. Accordingly
       we may say of a man who is subject to witchcraft, that he can in just the same way be preserved
       from witchcraft, or that this preservation comes of an Angel deputed to guard him; and this is the
       chief of all means of protection.
             And when it is said in Jeremias xxii: Write ye this man childless, a man that shall not prosper
       in his days: this is to be understood with regard to the choices of the will, in which one man
       prospers and another does not; and this also can be ascribed to the influence of the stars. For
       example: one man may be influenced by his stars to make a useful choice, such as to enter some
       religious Order. And when his understanding is enlightened to consider such a step, and by Divine
       operation his will is inclined to put it into execution, such a man is said to prosper well. Or
       similarly when a man is inclined to some trade, or anything that is useful. On the other hand, he
       will be called unfortunate when his choice is inclined by the higher Powers to unprofitable things.
             S. Thomas, in his third book of the Summa against the Gentiles, and in several places, speaks
       of these and many other opinions, when he discusses in what lies the difference that one man
       should be well born and another unfortunately born, that a man should be lucky or unlucky, or well
       or badly governed and guarded. For according to the disposition of his stars a man is said to be
       well or badly born, and so fortunate or unfortunate; and according as he is enlightened by an
       Angel, and follows such enlightenment, he is said to be well or badly guarded. And according as
       he is directed by God towards good, and follows it, he is said to be well governed. But these
       choices have no place here, since we are not concerned with them but with the preservation from
       witchcraft; and we have said enough for the present on this subject. We proceed to the rites
       practised by witches, and first to a consideration of how they lure the innocent into becoming
       partakers of their perfidies.

                                                                 Page 2 of 2




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a00b.html (4 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:15 PM]
Part II, Question I - P.2

                                                     Question I, Chapter I

                                                      Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                            HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                    All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a00b.html (5 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:15 PM]
Notes

            “Cassian.” John Cassian, monk and ascetic writer of Southern Gaul, and the first to introduce
        the rules of Eastern monasticism into the West, was born probably in Provence about 360; and
        died near Marseilles about 435. The two principal works of Cassian are the “Institutes; De
        institutis coenobiorum et de octo principalium uitiorum remediis libri XII”; and the “Collations”
        or “Conferences,” “Collationes XXIV.” The author has himself remarked upon the relation
        between the two works: “These books (‘the Institutes’) . . . are mainly taken up with what belongs
        to the outer man and the customs of the coenobis; the others (the ‘Conferences’) deal rather with
        the training of the inner man and the perfection of the heart.” The best edition of the works of
        Cassian is that by Petschenig, Vienna, 1885-88.
            Although never formally canonized, from very early days Cassian was regarded as a saint. At
        Marseilles his feast (with an octave) is celebrated 23 July, and his name is found in the Greek
        Calendar.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2002.html [2002-01-20 12:03:15 PM]
Notes

           “S. Heraclides.” Episcopus Tamasi in Cypro, cuius Festum agitur die xvii Septembris. See
        “Analecta Bollandiana,” XXVI, 238-9; and Fr. Nau, “Revue de l’Orient chrétien,” XII (197),
        125-38.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2003.html [2002-01-20 12:03:15 PM]
Notes

           “Blessed Thomas.” At the instance of his mother Theodora, Countess of Teano, S. Thomas,
        who had received the Dominican habit some time between 1240 and August 1243, was whilst on
        his way to Rome from Naples captured near Aquapendente by his two brothers, Landolfo and
        Rinaldo, officers in the army of the Emperor Frederick. They confined him for nearly two years in
        the fortress of San Giovanni at Rocca Secca. He revealed this vision of Holy Angels who endows
        him with the white girdle of chastity to his faithful friend, Reginald of Piperno. One of the
        particular devotions of the Dominican Order consists in wearing, as a devout memorial of this
        event, a white girdle for which a special form of blessing is presribed: “Benedictio Cinguli S.
        Thomae Aquinatis Ad Seruandam Castitatem.”




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2004.html [2002-01-20 12:03:15 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter I


                                  THE
                          MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                          PART II.
                                                    QUESTION I. CHAPTER I
Of the several Methods by which Devils through Witches Entice and Allure the Innocent to the Increase
                                of that Horrid Craft and Company.

              There are three methods above all by which devils, through the agency of witches, subvert the
       innocent, and by which that perfidy is continually being increased. And the first is through
       weariness, through inflicting grievous losses in their temporal possessions. For, as S. Gregory
       says: The devil often tempts us to give way from very weariness. And it is to be understood that it
       is within the power of a man to resist such temptation; but that God permits it as a warning to us
       not to give way to sloth. And in this sense is Judges ii to be understood, where it says that God did
       not destroy those nations, that through them He might prove the people of Israel; and it speaks of
       the neighbouring nations of the Canaanites, Jebusites, and others. And in our time the Hussites and
       other Heretics are permitted, so that they cannot be destroyed. Devils, therefore, by means of
       witches, so afflict their innocent neighbours with temporal losses, that they are to beg the suffrages
       of witches, and at length to submit themselves to their counsels; as many experiences have taught
       us.
              We know a stranger in the diocese of Augsburg, who before he was forty-four years old lost
       all his horses in succession through witchcraft. His wife, being afflicted with weariness by reason
       of this, consulted with witches, and after following their counsels, unwholesome as they were, all
       the horses which he bought after that (for he was a carrier) were preserved from witchcraft.
              And how many women have complained to us in our capacity of Inquisitors, that when their
       cows have been injured by being deprived of their milk, or in any other way, they have consulted
       with suspected witches, and even been given remedies by them, on condition that they would
       promise something to some spirit; and when they asked what they would have to promise, the
       witches answered that it was only a small thing, that they should agree to execute the instructions
       of that master with regard to certain observances during the Holy Offices of the Church, or to
       observe some silent reservations in their confessions to priests.
              Here it is to be noted that, as has already been hinted, this iniquity has small and scant
       beginnings, as that of the time of the elevation of the Body of Christ they spit on the ground, or
       shut their eyes, or mutter some vain words. We know a woman who yet lives, protected by the
       secular law, who, when the priest at the celebration of the Mass blesses the people, saying,
       Dominus uobiscum, always adds to herself these words in the vulgar tongue “Kehr mir die Zung
       im Arss umb.” Or they even say some such thing at confession after they have received absolution,
       or do not confess everything, especially mortal sins, and so by slow degrees are led to a total
       abnegation of the Faith, and to the abominable profession of sacrilege.
              This, or something like it, is the method which witches use towards honest matrons who are
       little given to carnal vices but concerned for worldly profit. But towards young girls, more given to
       bodily lusts and pleasures, they observe a different method, working through their carnal desires

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a01a.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:16 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter I

       and the pleasures of the flesh.
              Here it is to be noted that the devil is more eager and keen to tempt the good than the wicked,
       although in actual practice he tempts the wicked more than the good, because more aptitude for
       being tempted is found in the wicked than in the good. Therefore the devil tries all the harder to
       seduce all the more saintly virgins and girls; and there is reason in this, besides many examples of
       it.
              For since he already possesses the wicked, but not the good, he tries the harder to seduce into
       his power the good whom he does not, than the wicked whom he does, possess. Similarly any
       earthly prince takes up arms against those who do not acknowledge his rule rather than those who
       do not oppose him.
              And here is an example. Two witches were burned in Ratisbon, as we shall tell later where we
       treat of their methods of raising tempests. And one of them, who was a bath-woman, had
       confessed among other things the following: that she had suffered much injury from the devil for
       this reason. There was a certain devout virgin, the daughter of a very rich man whom there is no
       need to name, since the girl is now dead in the disposition of Divine mercy, and we would not that
       his thought should be perverted by evil; and the witch was ordered to seduce her by inviting her to
       her house on some Feast Day, in order that the devil himself, in the form of a young man, might
       speak with her. And although she had tried very often to accomplish this, yet whenever she had
       spoken to the young girl, she had protected herself with the sign of the Holy Cross. And no one
       can doubt that she did this at the instigation of a holy Angel, to repel the works of the devil.
              Another virgin living in the diocese of Strasburg confessed to one of us that she was alone on
       a certain Sunday in her father's house, when an old woman of that town came to visit here and,
       among other scurrilous words, made the following proposition; that, if she liked, she would take
       her to a place where there were some young men unknown to all the townsmen. And when, said
       the virgin, I consented, and followed her to her house, the old woman said, “See, we go upstairs to
       an upper room where the young men are; but take care not to make the sign of the Cross.” I gave
       her my promise not to do so, and as she was going up before me and I was going up the stairs, I
       secretly crossed myself. At the top of the stairs, when we were both standing outside the room, the
       hag turned angrily upon me with a horrible countenance, and looking at me said, “Curse you! Why
       did you cross yourself? Go away from here. Depart in the name of the devil.” And so I returned
       unharmed to my home.
              It can be seen from this how craftily that old enemy labours in the seduction of souls. For it
       was in this way that the bath-woman whom we have mentioned, and who was burned, confessed
       that she had been seduced by some old women. A different method, however, was used in the case
       of her companion witch, who had met the devil in human form on the road while she herself was
       going to visit her lover for the purpose of fornication. And when the Incubus devil had seen her,
       and has asked her whether she recognized him, and she had said that she did not, he had answered"
       “I am the devil; and if you wish, I will always be ready at your pleasure, and will not fail you in
       any necessity.” And when she had consented, she continued for eighteen years, up to the end of her
       life, to practise diabolical filthiness with him, together with a total abnegation of the Faith as a
       necessary condition.
              There is also a third method of temptation through the way of sadness and poverty. For when
       girls have been corrupted, and have been scorned by their lovers after they have immodestly
       copulated with them in the hope and promise of marriage with them, and have found themselves
       disappointed in all their hopes and everywhere despised, they turn to the help and protection of
       devils; either for the sake of vengeance by bewitching those lovers or the wives they have married,

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a01a.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:16 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter I

       or for the sake of giving themselves up to every sort of lechery. Alas! experience tells us that there
       is no number to such girls, and consequently the witches that spring from this class are
       innumerable. Let us give a few out of many examples.
             There is a place in the diocese of Brixen where a young man deposed the following facts
       concerning the bewitchment of his wife.
             “In the time of my youth I loved a girl who importuned me to marry her; but I refused her and
       married another girl from another country. But wishing for friendship's sake to please her, I invited
       her to the wedding. She came, and while the other honest women were wishing us luck and
       offering gifts, she raised her hand and, in the hearing of the other women who were standing
       round, said, You will have few days of health after to-day. My bride was frightened, since she did
       not know her (for, as I have said, I had married her from another country), and asked the
       bystanders who she was who had threatened her in that way; and they said that she was a loose and
       vagrom woman. None the less, it happened just as she had said. For after a few days my wife was
       so bewitched that she lost the use of all her limbs, and even now, after ten years, the effects of
       witchcraft can be seen on her body.”
             If we were to collect all the similar instances which have occurred in one town of that
       diocese, it would take a whole book; but they are written and preserved at the house of the Bishop
       of Brixen, who still lives to testify to their truth, astounding and unheard-of though they are.
             But we must not pass over in silence one unheard-of and astonishing instance. A certain
       high-born Count in the ward of Westerich, in the diocese of Strasburg, married a noble girl of
       equal birth; but after he had celebrated the wedding, he was for three years unable to know her
       carnally, on account, as the event proved, of a certain charm which prevented him. In great
       anxiety, and not knowing what to do, he called loudly on the Saints of God. It happened that he
       went to the State of Metz to negotiate some business; and while he was talking about the streets
       and squares of the city, attended by his servants and domiciles, he met a certain women who had
       formerly been his mistress. Seeing her, and not at all thinking of the spell that was on him, he
       spontaneously addressed her kindly for the sake of their old friendship, asking her how she did,
       and whether she was well. And she, seeing the Count's gentleness, in her turn asked very
       particularly after his health and affairs; and when he answered that he was well, and that
       everything prospered with him, she was astonished and was silent for a time. The Count, seeing
       her thus astonished, again spoke kindly to her, inviting her to converse with him. So she inquired
       after his wife, and received a similar reply, that she was in all respects well. Then she asked if he
       had any children; and the Count said he had three sons, one born in each year. At that she was
       more astonished, and was again silent for a while. And the Count asked her, Why, my dear, do you
       make such careful inquiries? I am sure that you congratulate my on my happiness. Then she
       answered, Certainly I congratulate you; but curse that old woman who said she would bewitch
       your body so that you could not have connexion with your wife! And in proof of this, there is a pot
       in the well in the middle of your yard containing certain objects evilly bewitched, and this was
       placed there in order that, as long as its contents were preserved intact, for so long you would be
       unable to cohabit. But see! it is all in vain, and I am glad, etc. On his return home the Count did
       not delay to have the well drained; and, finding the pot, burned its contents and all, whereupon he
       immediately recovered the virility which he had lost. Wherefore the Countess again invited all the
       nobility to a fresh wedding celebration, saying that she was now the Lady of that castle and estate,
       after having for so long remained a virgin. For the sake of the Count's reputation it is not expedient
       to name that castle and estate; but we have related this story in order that the truth of the matter
       may be known, to bring so great a crime into open detestation.

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a01a.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:16 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter I

           From this it is clear that witches use various methods to increase their numbers. For the
       above-mentioned woman, because she had been supplanted by the Count's wife, case that spell
       upon the Count with the help of another witches; and this is how one witchcraft brings
       innumerable others in its train.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                     Question I, Chapter II

                                                      Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                         HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                 All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a01a.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:16 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter II


                                  THE
                          MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                       PART II, QUESTION I.
                                                          CHAPTER II
                                  Of the Way whereby a Formal Pact with Evil is made.

             The method by which they profess their sacrilege through an open pact of fidelity to devils
       varies according to the several practices to which different witches are addicted. And to understand
       this it first must be noted that there are, as was shown in the First Part of this treatise, three kinds
       of witches; namely, those who injure but cannot cure; those who cure but, through some strange
       pact with the devil, cannot injure; and those who both injure and cure. And among those who
       injure, one class in particular stands out, which can perform every sort of witchcraft and spell,
       comprehending all that all the others individually can do. Wherefore, if we describe the method of
       profession in their case, it will suffice also for all the other kinds. And this class is made up of
       those who, against every instinct of human or animal nature, are in the habit of eating and
       devouring the children of their own species.
             And this is the most powerful class of witches, who practise innumerable other harms also.
       For they raise hailstorms and hurtful tempests and lightnings; cause sterility in men and animals;
       offer to devils, or otherwise kill, the children whom they do not devour. But these are only the
       children who have not been re-born by baptism at the font, for they cannot devour those who have
       been baptized, nor any without God's permission. They can also, before the eyes of their parents,
       and when no one is in sight, throw into the water children walking by the water side; they make
       horses go mad under their riders; they can transport themselves from place to place through the air,
       either in body or in imagination; they can affect Judges and Magistrates so that they cannot hurt
       them; they can cause themselves and other to keep silence under torture; they can bring about a
       great trembling in the hands and horror in the minds of those who would arrest them; they can
       show to others occult things and certain future events, by the information of devils, though this
       may sometimes have a natural cause (see the question: Whether devils can foretell the future, in
       the Second Book of Sentences); they can see absent things as if they were present; they can turn the
       minds of men to inordinate love or hatred; they can at times strike whom they will with lightning,
       and even kill some men and animals; they can make of no effect the generative desires, and even
       the power of copulation, cause abortion, kill infants in the mother's womb by a mere exterior
       touch; they can at time bewitch men and animals with a mere look, without touching them, and
       cause death; they dedicate their own children to devils; and in short, as has been said, they can
       cause all the plagues which other witches can only cause in part, that is, when the Justice of God
       permits such things to be. All these things this most powerful of all classes of witches can do, but
       they cannot undo them.
             But it is common to all of them to practise carnal copulation with devils; therefore, if we
       show the method used by this chief class in their profession of their sacrilege, anyone may easily
       understand the method of the other classes.
             There were such witches lately, thirty years ago, in the district of Savoy, towards the State of

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a02a.html (1 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:17 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter II

       Berne, as Nider tells in his Formicarius. And there are now some in the country of Lombardy, in
       the domains of the Duke of Austria, where the Inquisitor of Como, as we told in the former Part,
       caused forty-one witches to be burned in one year; and he was fifty-five years old, and still
       continues to labour in the Inquisition.
             Now the method of profession is twofold. One is a solemn ceremony, like a solemn vow. The
       other is private, and can be made to the devil at any hour alone. The first method is when witches
       meet together in the conclave on a set day, and the devil appears to them in the assumed body of a
       man, and urges them to keep faith with him, promising them worldly prosperity and length of life;
       and they recommend a novice to his acceptance. And the devil asks whether she will abjure the
       Faith, and forsake the holy Christian religion and the worship of the Anomalous Woman (for so
       they call the Most Blessed Virgin MARY), and never venerate the Sacraments; and if he finds the
       novice or disciple willing, then the devil stretches out his hand, and so does the novice, and she
       swears with upraised hand to keep that covenant. And when this is done, the devil at once adds
       that this is not enough; and when the disciple asks what more must be done, the devil demands the
       following oath of homage to himself: that she give herself to him, body and soul, for ever, and do
       her utmost to bring others of both sexes into his power. He adds, finally, that she is to make certain
       unguents from the bones and limbs of children, especially those who have been baptized; by all
       which means she will be able to fulfil all her wishes with his help.
             We Inquisitors had credible experience of this method in the town of Breisach in the diocese
       of Basel, receiving full information from a young girl witch who had been converted, whose aunt
       also had been burned in the diocese of Strasburg. And she added that she had become a witch by
       the method in which her aunt had first tried to seduce her.
             For one day her aunt ordered her to go upstairs with her, and at her command to go into a
       room where she found fifteen young men clothed in green garments after the manner of German
       knights. And her aunt said to her: Choose whom you wish from these young men, and he will take
       you for his wife. And when she said she did not wish or any of them, she was sorely beaten and at
       last consented, and was initiated according to the aforesaid ceremony. She said also that she was
       often transported by night with her aunt over vast distances, even from Strasburg to Cologne.
             This is she who occasioned our inquiry in the First Part into the question whether witches are
       truly and bodily transported by devils from place to place: and this was on account of the words of
       the Canon (6, q. 5, Episcopi), which seem to imply that they are only so carried in imagination;
       whereas they are at times actually and bodily transported.
             For when she was asked whether it was only in imagination and phantastically that they so
       rode, through an illusion of devils, she answered that they did so in both ways; according to the
       truth which we shall declare later of the manner in which they are transferred from place to place.
       She said also that the greatest injuries were inflicted by midwives, because they were under an
       obligation to kill or offer to devils as many children as possible; and that she had been severely
       beaten by her aunt because she had opened a secret pot and found the heads of a great many
       children. And much more she told us, having first, as was proper, taken an oath to speak the truth.
             And he account of the method of professing the devil's faith undoubtedly agrees with what
       has been written by that most eminent Doctor, John Nider, who even in our times has written very
       illuminatingly; and it may be especially remarked that he tells of the following which he had from
       an Inquisitor of the diocese of Edua, who held many inquisitions on witches in that diocese, and
       caused many to be burned.
             For he says that this Inquisitor told him that in the Duchy of Lausanne certain witches had
       cooked and eaten their own children, and that the following was the method in which they became

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a02a.html (2 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:17 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter II

       initiated into such practices. The witches met together and, by their art, summoned a devil in the
       form of a man, to whom the novice was compelled to swear to deny the Christian religion, never to
       adore the Eucharist, and to tread the Cross underfoot whenever she could do so secretly.
             Here is another example from the same source. There was lately a general report, brought to
       the notice of Peter the Judge in Boltingen, that thirteen infants had been devoured in the State of
       Berne; and the public justice exacted full vengeance on the murderers. And when Peter asked one
       of the captive witches in what manner they ate children, she replied: “This is the manner of it. We
       set our snares chiefly for unbaptized children, and even for those that have been baptized,
       especially when they have not been protected by the sign of the Cross and prayers” (Reader, notice
       that, at the devil's command, they take the unbaptized chiefly, in order that they may not be
       baptized), “and with our spells we kill them in their cradles or even when they are sleeping by their
       parents' side, in such a way that they afterwards are thought to have been overlain or to have died
       some other natural death. Then we secretly take them from their graves, and cook them in a
       cauldron, until the whole flesh comes away from the bones to make a soup which may easily be
       drunk. Of the more solid matter we make an unguent which is of virtue to help us in our arts and
       pleasures and our transportations; and with the liquid we fill a flask or skin, whoever drinks from
       which, with the addition of a few other ceremonies, immediately acquires much knowledge and
       becomes a leader in our sect.”
             Here is another very clear and distinct example. A young man and his wife, both witches,
       were imprisoned in Berne; and the man, shut up by himself apart from her in a separate tower,
       said: “If I could obtain pardon for my sins, I would willingly declare all that I know about
       witchcraft; for I see that I ought to die.” And when he was told by the learned clerks who were
       there that he could obtain complete pardon if he truly repented, he joyfully resigned himself to
       death, and laid bare the method by which he had first been infected with his heresy. “The
       following,” he said, “is the manner in which I was seduced. It is first necessary that, on a Sunday
       before the consecration of Holy Water, the novice should enter the church with the masters, and
       there in their presence deny Christ, his Faith, baptism, and the whole Church. And then he must
       pay homage to the Little Master, for so and not otherwise do they call the devil.” Here it is to be
       noted that this method agrees with those that have been recounted; for it is immaterial whether the
       devil is himself present or not, when homage is offered to him. For this he does in his cunning,
       perceiving the temperament of the novice, who might be frightened by his actual presence into
       retracting his vows, whereas he would be more easily persuaded to consent by those who are
       known to him. And therefore they call him the Little Master when he is absent, that through
       seeming disparagement of his Master the novice may feel less fear. “And then he drinks from the
       skin, which has been mentioned, and immediately feels within himself a knowledge of all our arts
       and an understanding of our rites and ceremonies. And in this manner was I seduced. But I believe
       my wife to be so obstinate that she would rather go straight to the fire than confess the smallest
       part of the truth; but, alas! we are both guilty.” And as the young man said, so it happened in every
       respect. For the young man confessed and was seen to die in the greatest contrition; but the wife,
       though convicted by witnesses, would not confess any of the truth, either under torture or in death
       itself; but when the fire had been prepared by the gaoler, cursed him in the most terrible words,
       and so was burned. And from these examples their method of initiation in solemn conclave is
       made clear.
             The other private method is variously performed. For sometimes when men or women have
       been involved in some bodily or temporal affliction, the devil comes to them speaking to them in
       person, and at times speaking to them through the mouth of someone else; and he promises that, if

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a02a.html (3 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:17 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter II

       they will agree to his counsels, he will do for them whatever they wish. But he starts from small
       things, as was said in the first chapter, and leads gradually to the bigger things. We could mention
       many examples which have come to our knowledge in the Inquisition, but, since this matter
       presents no difficulty, it can briefly be included with the previous matter.

                        A Few Points are to be Noticed in the Explanation of their Oath of Homage.

             Now there are certain points to be noted concerning the homage which the devil exacts, as,
       namely, for what reason and in what different ways he does this. It is obvious that his principal
       motive is to offer the greater offence to the Divine Majesty by usurping to himself a creature
       dedicated to God, and thus more certainly to ensure his disciple's future damnation, which is his
       chief object. Nevertheless, it is often found by us that he has received such homage for a fixed
       term of years at the time of the profession of perfidy; and sometimes he exacts the profession only,
       postponing the homage to a later day.
             And let us declare that the profession consists in a total or partial abnegation of the Faith:
       total, as has been said before, when the Faith is entirely abjured; partial, when the original pact
       makes it incumbent on the witch to observe certain ceremonies in opposition to the decrees of the
       Church, such as fasting on Sundays, eating meat on Fridays, concealing certain crimes at
       confession, or some such profane thing. But let us declare that homage consists in the surrender of
       body and soul.
             And we can assign four reasons why the devil requires the practice of such things. For we
       showed in the First Part of this treatise, when we examined whether devils could turn the minds of
       men to love or hatred, that they cannot enter the inner thoughts of the heart, since this belongs to
       God alone. But the devil can arrive at a knowledge of men's thoughts by conjecture, as will be
       shown later. Therefore, if that cunning enemy sees that a novice will be hard to persuade, he
       approaches her gently, exacting only small things that he may gradually lead her to greater things.
             Secondly, it must be believed that there is some diversity among those who deny the Faith,
       since some do so with their lips but not in their heart, and some both with their lips and in their
       heart. Therefore the devil, wishing to know whether their profession comes from the heart as well
       as from the lips, sets them a certain period, so that he may understand their minds from their works
       and behaviour.
             Thirdly, if after the lapse of a set time he find that she is less willing to perform certain
       practices, and is bound to him only by word but not in her heart, he presumes that the Divine
       Mercy has given her the guardianship of a good Angel, which he knows to be of great power. Then
       he casts her off, and tries to expose her to temporal afflictions, so that he gain some profit from her
       despair.
                                                                 Page 1 of 2


                                      Question I, Chapter II Continued . . . .

                                                      Main Index




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a02a.html (4 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:17 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter II

                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                         HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                 All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a02a.html (5 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:17 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter II


                                  THE
                          MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                    PART II, QUESTION I.
                                                   CHAPTER II CONTINUED

             The truth of this is clear. For if it is asked why some witches will not confess the truth under
       even the greatest tortures, while other readily confess their crimes when they are questioned (and
       some of them, after they have confessed, try to kill themselves by hanging), the reason is as
       follows. It may truly be said that, when it is not due to a Divine impulse conveyed through a holy
       Angel that a witch is made to confess the truth and abandon the spell of silence, then it is due to
       the devil whether she preserves silence of confesses her crimes. The former is the case with those
       whom he knows to have denied the Faith both with their lips and in their hearts, and also to have
       given him their homage; for he is sure of their constancy. But in the latter case he withdraws his
       protection, since he knows that they are of no profit to him.
             We have often learned from the confessions of those whom we have caused to be burned, that
       they have not been willing agents of witchcraft. And they have not said this in the hope of
       escaping damnation, for its truth is witnessed by the blows and stripes which they have received
       from devils when they have been unwilling to perform their orders, and we have often seen their
       swollen and livid faces. Similarly, after they have confessed their crimes under torture they always
       try to hang themselves; and this we know for a fact; for after the confession of their crimes, guards
       are deputed to watch them all the time, and even then, when the guards have been negligent, they
       have been found hanged with their shoe-laces or garments. For, as we have said, they devil causes
       this, lest they should obtain pardon through contrition or sacramental confession; and those whose
       hearts he cannot seduce from finding grace with God, he tries to lead into despair through worldly
       loss and a horrible death. However, through the great grace of God, as it is pious to believe, they
       can obtain forgiveness by true contrition and pure confession, when they have not been willing
       participators in those foul and filthy practices.
             This is exemplified by certain events which took place hardly three years ago in the dioceses
       of Strasburg and Constance, and in the towns of Hagenau and Ratisbon. For in the first town one
       hanged herself with a trifling and flimsy garment. Another, named Walpurgis, was notorious for
       her power of preserving silence, and used to teach other women how to achieve a like quality of
       silence by cooking their first-born sons in an oven. Many such examples are to our hand, as they
       are also in the case of others burned in the second town, some of which will be related.
             And there is a forth reason why the devil exacts a varying degree of homage, making it
       relatively small in some cases because he is more skilful than Astronomers in knowing the length
       if human life, and so can easily fix a term which he knows will be preceded by death, or can, in the
       manner already told, forestall natural death with some accident.
             All this, in short, can be shown by the actions and behaviour of witches. But first we can
       deduce the astuteness of the devil in such things. For according to S. Augustine in the de Natura
       Daemonis seven reasons are assigned why devils can conjecture probable future events, though
       they cannot know them certainly. The first is that they have a natural subtlety in their


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a02b.html (1 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:03:17 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter II

       understanding, by which they arrive at their knowledge without the process of reasoning which is
       necessary for us. Secondly, by their long experience and by revelation of supernal spirits, they
       know more than we do. For S. Isidore says that the Doctors have often affirmed that devils derive
       their marvellous cunning from three sources, their natural subtlety, their long experience, and the
       revelation of supernal spirits. The third reason is their rapidity of motion, by which they can with
       miraculous speed anticipate in the West things which are happening in the East. Fourthly, just as
       they are able, with God's permission, to cause disease and famines, so also they can predict them.
       Fifthly, they can more cunningly read the signs of death than a physician can by looking at the
       urine or feeling the pulse. For just as a physician sees signs in a sick man which a layman would
       not notice, so the devil sees what no man can naturally see. Sixthly, they can by signs which
       proceed from a man's mind conjecture more astutely than the wisest men what is or will be in that
       man's mind. For they know what impulses, and therefore what actions, will probably follow.
       Seventhly, they understand better than men the acts and writings of the Prophets, and, since on
       these much of the future depends, they can foretell from them much that will happen. Therefore it
       is not wonderful that they can know the natural term of a man's life; though it is different in the
       case of the accidental term when a witch is burned; for this the devil ultimately causes when, as
       has been said, he finds a witch reluctant, and fears for her conversion; whereas he protects even up
       to their natural death others whom he knows to be his willing agents.
             Let us give examples of both these cases, which are known to us. There was in the diocese of
       Basel, in a town called Oberweiler situated on the Rhine, an honest parish priest, who fondly held
       the opinion, or rather error, that there was no witchcraft in the world, but that it only existed in the
       imagination of men who attributed such things to witches. And God wished so to purge him of this
       error that he might even be made aware of the practice of devils in setting a term to the lives of
       witches. For as he was hastening to cross a bridge, on some business that he had to do, he met a
       certain old woman in his hurry, and would not give way to her, but pressed on so that he thrust the
       old woman into the mud. She indignantly broke into a flood of abuse, and said to him, “Father,
       you will not cross with impunity.” And though he took small notice of those words, in the night,
       when he wished to get out of his bed, he felt himself bewitched below the waist, so that he always
       had to be supported by the arms of other men when he wished to go to the church; and so he
       remained for three years, under the care of his own mother. After that time the old woman fell
       sick, the hag whom he had always suspected as being the cause of his witchcraft, owing to the
       abusive words with which she had threatened him; and it happened that she sent to him to hear her
       confession. And though the priest angrily said, “Let her confess to the devil her master,” yet, at the
       instance of his mother, he went to the house supported by two servants, and sat at the head of the
       bed where the witch lay. And the two servants listened outside the window, so eager were they to
       know whether she would confess that she had bewitched the priest. Now it happened that, though
       she made no mention in her confession of having been the cause of his malady, after the
       confession was finished, she said, “Father, do you know who bewitched you?” And when he
       gently answered that he did not, she added, “You suspect me, and with reason; for know that I
       brought it upon you for this reason,” explaining as we have already told. And when he begged to
       be liberated, she said, “Lo! the set time has come, and I must die; but I will so cause it that in a few
       days, after my death, you will be healed.” And so it happened. For she died at the time fixed by the
       devil, and within thirty days the priest found himself completely healed in one night. The name of
       that priest is Father Hässlin, and he lives yet in the diocese of Strasburg.
             Similarly in the diocese of Basel, in the village called Buchel, near the town of Gewyll, this
       happened. A certain woman was taken, and finally burned, who for six years had had an Incubus

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a02b.html (2 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:03:17 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter II

       devil, even when she was lying in bed by the side of her husband. And this she did three times a
       week, on Sundays, Tuesdays, and Thursdays, and on some of the other more holy nights. But the
       homage she had given to the devil was of such a sort that she was bound to dedicate herself body
       and soul to him for ever, after seven years. But God provided mercifully: for she was taken in the
       sixth year and condemned to the fire, and having truly and completely confessed, is believed to
       have obtained pardon from God. For she went most willingly to her death, saying that she would
       gladly suffer an even more terrible death, if only she could be set free from and escape the power
       of the devil.
                                                                 Page 2 of 2


                                                    Question I, Chapter III

                                                      Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                         HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                 All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a02b.html (3 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:03:17 PM]
Notes

           “De Natura Daemonis.” “De Diuinatione Daemonum,” written 406-11. Migne, “Patres
        Latini,” XL, pp. 581-92.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2005.html [2002-01-20 12:03:17 PM]
Notes

           “Holy Nights.” Saturday, however, was always particularly avoided as being the day sacred to
        the Immaculate Mother of God. See my “History of Witchcraft,” c. IV, pp. 115-16.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2006.html [2002-01-20 12:03:17 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter III


                                   THE
                           MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                       PART II, QUESTION I.
                                                          CHAPTER III
                                       How they are Transported from Place to Place.

             And now we must consider their ceremonies and in what manner they proceed in their
       operations, first in respect of their actions towards themselves and in their own persons. And
       among their chief operations are being bodily transported from place to place, and to practise
       carnal connexion with Incubus devils, which we shall treat of separately, beginning with their
       bodily vectification. But here it must be noted that this transvection offers a difficulty, which has
       often been mentioned, arising from one single authority, where it is said: It cannot be admitted as
       true that certain wicked women, perverted by Satan and seduced by the illusions and phantasms of
       devils, do actually, as they believe and profess, ride in the night-time on certain beasts with Diana,
       a goddess of the Pagans, or with Herodias and an innumerable multitude of women, and in the
       untimely silence of night pass over immense tracts of land, and have to obey her in all things as
       their Mistress, etc. Wherefore the priest of God ought to preach to the people that this is altogether
       false, and that such phantasms are sent not by God, but by an evil Spirit to confuse the minds of
       the faithful. For Satan himself transforms himself into various shapes and forms; and by deluding
       in dreams the mind which he holds captive, leads it through devious ways, etc.
             And there are those who, taking their example from S. Germain and a certain other man who
       kept watch over his daughter to determine this matter, sometimes preach that this is an altogether
       impossible thing; and that it is indiscreet to ascribe to witches and their operations such levitations,
       as well as the injuries which happen to men, animals, and the fruits of the earth; since just as they
       are the victims of phantasy in their transvections, so also are they deluded in the matter of the harm
       they wreak on living creatures.
             But this opinion was refuted as heretical in the First Question; for it leaves out of account the
       Divine permission with regard to the devil's power, which extends to even greater things than this:
       and it is contrary to the meaning of Sacred Scripture, and has caused intolerable damage to Holy
       Church, since now for many years, thanks to this pestiferous doctrine, witches have remained
       unpunished, because the secular courts have lost their power to punish them. Therefore the diligent
       reader will consider what was there set down for the stamping out of that opinion, and will for the
       present note how they are transported, and in what ways this is possible, of which some examples
       will be adduced.
             It is shown in various ways that they can be bodily transported; and first, from the operations
       of other Magicians. For if they could not be transported, it would either be because God does not
       permit it, or because the devil cannot do this since it is contrary to nature. It cannot be for the first
       reason, for both greater and less things can be done by the permission of God; and greater things
       are often done both to children and men, even to just men confirmed in grace.
             For when it is asked whether substitutions of children can be affected by the work of devils,
       and whether the devil can carry a man from place to place even against his will; to the first

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a03a.html (1 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:18 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter III

       question the answer is, Yes. For William of Paris says in the last part of his De Uniuerso:
       Substitutions of children are, with God's permission, possible, so that the devil can affect a change
       of the child or even a transformation. For such children are always miserable and crying; and
       although four or five mothers could hardly support enough milk for them, they never grow fat, yet
       are heavy beyond the ordinary. But this should neither be affirmed nor denied to women, on
       account of the great fear which it may cause them, but they should be instructed to ask the opinion
       of learned men. For God permits this on account of the sins of the parents, in that sometimes men
       curse their pregnant wives, saying, May you be carrying a devil! or some such thing. In the same
       way impatient women often say something of the sort. And many examples have been given by
       other men, some of them pious men.
             For Vincent of Beauvais (Spec. Hist., XXVI, 43) related a story told by S. Peter Damian of a
       five-year-old son of a nobleman, who was for the time living in a monastery; and one night he was
       carried out of the monastery into a locked mill, where he was found in the morning. And when he
       was questioned, he said that he had been carried by some men to a great feast and bidden to eat;
       and afterwards he was put into the mill through the roof.
             And what of those Magicians whom we generally call Necromancers, who are often carried
       through the air by devils for long distances? And sometimes they even persuade others to go with
       them on a horse, which is not really a horse but a devil in that form, and, as they say, thus warn
       their companions not to make the sign of the Cross.
             And though we are two who write this book, one of us has very often seen and known such
       men. For there is a man who was once a scholar, and is now believed to be a priest in the diocese
       of Freising, who used to say that at one time he had been bodily carried through the air by a devil,
       and taken to the most remote parts.
             There lives another priest in Oberdorf, a town near Landshut, who was at that time a friend of
       that one of us, who saw with his own eyes such a transportation, and tells how the man was borne
       on high with arms stretched out, shouting but not whimpering. And the cause, as he tells it, was as
       follows. A number of scholars had met together to drink beer, and they all agreed that the one who
       fetched the beer should not have to pay anything. And so one of them was going to fetch the beer,
       and on opening the door saw a thick cloud before the grunsel, and returning in terror told his
       companions why he would not go for the drink. Then that one of them who was carried away said
       angrily: “Even if the devil were there, I shall fetch the drink.” And, going out, he was carried
       through the air in the sight of all the others.
             And indeed it must be confessed that such things can happen not only to those who are
       awake, but also to men who are asleep; namely, they can be bodily transported through the air
       while they are fast asleep.
             This is clear in the case of certain men who walk in their sleep on the roofs of houses and
       over the highest buildings, and no one can oppose their progress either on high or below. And if
       they are called by their own names by the other bystanders, they immediately fall crashing to the
       ground.
             Many think, and not without reason, that this is devils' work. For devils are of many different
       kinds, and some, who fell from the lower choir of Angels, are tortured as if for smaller sins with
       lighter punishments as well as the punishment of damnation which they must suffer eternally. And
       these cannot hurt anybody, at least not seriously, but for the most part carry out only practical
       jokes. And others are Incubi or Succubi, who punish men in the night, defiling them in the sin of
       lechery. It is not wonderful if they are given also to horse-play such as this.


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a03a.html (2 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:18 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter III

             The truth can be deduced from the words of Cassian, Collationes I, where he says that there is
       no doubt that there are as many different unclean spirits as there are different desires in men. For it
       is manifest that some of them, which the common people call Fauns, and we call Trolls, which
       abound in Norway, are such buffoons and jokers that they haunt certain places and roads and,
       without being able to do any hurt to those who pass by, are content with mocking and deluding
       them, and try to weary them rather than hurt them. And some of them only visit men with harmless
       nightmares. But others are so furious and truculent that they are not content to afflict with an
       atrocious dilation the bodies of those whom they inflate, but even come rushing from on high and
       hasten to strike them with the most savage blows. Our author means that they do not only possess
       men, but torture them horribly, as did those which are described in S. Matthew viii.
             From this we can conclude, first that it must not be said that witches cannot be locally
       transported because God does not permit it. For if He permits it in the case of the just and
       innocent, and of other Magicians, how should He not in the case of those who are totally dedicated
       to the devil? And we say with all reverence: Did not the devil take up Our Saviour, and carry Him
       up to a high place, as the Gospel testifies?
             Neither can the second argument of our opponents be conceded, that the devil cannot do this
       thing. For it has already been shown that he has so great natural power, exceeding all corporeal
       power, that there is no earthly power that can be compared with him; as it is said: “There is no
       power on earth that can be compared with him,” etc. Indeed the natural power or virtue which is in
       Lucifer is so great that there is none greater among the good Angels in Heaven. For just as he
       excelled all the Angels in his nature, and not his nature, but only his grace, was diminished by his
       Fall, so that nature still remains in him, although it is darkened and bound. Wherefore the gloss on
       that “There is no power on earth” says: Although he excels all things, yet he is subject to the
       merits of the Saints.
             Two objections which someone may bring forward are not valid. First, that man's soul could
       resist him, and that the text seems to speak of one devil in particular, since it speaks in the
       singular, namely Lucifer. And because it was he who tempted Christ in the wilderness, and
       seduced the first man, he is now bound in chains. And the other Angels are not so powerful, since
       he excels them all. Therefore the other spirits cannot transport wicked men through the air from
       place to place.
             These arguments have no force. For, to consider the Angels first, even the least Angel is
       incomparably superior to all human power, as can be proved in many ways. First, a spiritual is
       stronger than a corporeal power, and so is the power of an Angel, or even of the soul, greater than
       that of the body. Secondly, as to the soul; every bodily shape owes its individuality to matter, and,
       in the case of human beings, to the fact that a soul informs it; but immaterial forms are absolute
       intelligences, and therefore have an absolute and more universal power. For this reason, the soul
       when joined to the body cannot in this way suddenly transfer its body locally or raise it up in the
       air; although it could easily do so, with God's permission, if it were separate from its body. Much
       more, then, is this possible to an entirely immaterial spirit, such as a good or bad Angel. For a
       good Angel transported Habacuc in a moment from Judaea to Chaldaea. And for this reason it is
       concluded that those who by night are carried in their sleep over high buildings are not carried by
       their own souls, nor by the influence of the stars, but by some mightier power, as was shown
       above.
             Thirdly, it is the nature of the body to be moved, as to place, directly by a spiritual nature;
       and, as Aristotle says, Physics, VIII, local motion is the first of bodily motions; and he proves this


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a03a.html (3 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:18 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter III

       by saying that local motion is not intrinsically in the power of any body as such, but is due to some
       exterior force.
             Wherefore it is concluded, not so much from the holy Doctors as from the Philosophers, that
       the highest bodies, that is, the stars, are moved by spiritual essences, and by separate Intelligences
       which are good both by nature and in intention. For we see that the soul is the prime and chief
       cause of local motion in the body.
             It must be said, therefore, that neither in its physical capacity nor in that of its soul can the
       human body resist being suddenly transported from place to place, with God's permission, by a
       spiritual essence good both in intention and by nature, when the good, who are confirmed in grace,
       are transported; or by an essence good by nature, but not good in intention, when the wicked are
       transported. Any who wish may refer to S. Thomas in three articles in Part I, question 90, and
       again in his question concerning Sin, and also in the Second Book of Sentences, dist. 7, on the
       power of devils over bodily effects.
             Now the following is their method of being transported. They take the unguent which, as we
       have said, they make at the devil's instruction from the limbs of children, particularly of those
       whom they have killed before baptism, and anoint with it a chair or a broomstick; whereupon they
       are immediately carried up into the air, either by day or by night, and either visibly or, if they wish,
       invisibly; for the devil can conceal a body by the interposition of some other substance, as was
       shown in the First Part of the treatise where we spoke of the glamours and illusions caused by the
       devil. And although the devil for the most part performs this by means of this unguent, to the end
       that children should be deprived of the grace of baptism and of salvation, yet he often seems to
       affect the same transvection without its use. For at times he transports the witches on animals,
       which are not true animals but devils in that form; and sometimes even without any exterior help
       they are visibly carried solely by the operation of the devil's power.
             Here is an instance of a visible transportation in the day-time. In the town of Waldshut on the
       Rhine, in the diocese of Constance, there was a certain witch who was so detested by the
       townsfolk that she was not invited to the celebration of a wedding which, however, nearly all the
       other townsfolk were present. Being indignant because of this, and wishing to be revenged, she
       summoned a devil and, telling him the cause of her vexation, asked him to raise a hailstorm and
       drive all the wedding guests from their dancing; and the devil agreed, and raising her up, carried
       her through the air to a hill near the town, in the sight of some shepherds. And since, as she
       afterwards confessed, she had no water to pour into the trench (for this, as we shall show, is the
       method they use to raise hailstorms), she made a small trench and filled it with her urine instead of
       water, and stirred it with her finger, after their custom, with the devil standing by. Then the devil
       suddenly raised that liquid up and sent a violent storm of hailstones which fell only on the dancers
       and townsfolk. And when they had dispersed and were discussing among themselves the cause of
       that storm, the witch shortly afterwards entered the town; and this greatly aroused their suspicions.
       But when the shepherds had told what they had seen, their suspicions became almost a certainty.
       So she was arrested, and confessed that she had done this thing because she had not been invited to
       the wedding: and for this, and for many other witchcrafts which she had perpetrated, she was
       burned.
                                                                 Page 1 of 2




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a03a.html (4 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:18 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter III

                                     Question I, Chapter III Continued . . . .

                                                      Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                         HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                 All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a03a.html (5 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:18 PM]
Notes

           “S. Peter Damian.” Doctor of the Church, Cardinal-Bishop of Ostia, born at Ravenna 1007;
        died at Faenza, 21 February, 1072. His works, which have been more than once collected, may be
        conveniently found in Migne, “Patres Latini,” CXLIV-CXLV.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2007.html [2002-01-20 12:03:18 PM]
Notes

           “Habacuc.” “Daniel” xiv, 32-38:
           32. Now there was in Judea a prophet called Habacuc, and he had boiled pottage, and had
        broken bread in a bowl: and was going into the field, to carry it to the reapers.
           33. And the angel of the Lord said to Habacuc: Carry the dinne which thou hast into Babylon
        to Daniel, who is the lions' den.
           34. And Habacuc said: Lord, I never saw Babylon, nor do I know the den.
           35. And the angel of the Lord took him by the top of his head, and carried him by the hair on
        his head, and set him in Babylon over the den in the force of his spirit.
           36. And Habacuc cried, saying: O Daniel, thou servant of God, take the dinner that God hath
        sent thee.
           37. And Daniel said: Thous hast remembered me, O God, and thou hast not forsaken them that
        love thee.
           38. And Daniel arose and ate. And the angel of the Lord presently set Habacuc again in his
        own place.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2008.html [2002-01-20 12:03:19 PM]
Notes

            Henry Boguet “Discours des Sorciers,” Lyons, 1590, XVI, 4, points out that this flying ointment
        is of itself useless. The actual formulae for its confection have been preserved and the employment
        thereof is to be considered, say most demonologists, as a piece of vain and empty ceremony of
        Satan, yet more to delude his votaries.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2009.html [2002-01-20 12:03:19 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter III


                                   THE
                           MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                     PART II, QUESTION I.
                                                   CHAPTER III CONTINUED

             And since the public report of this sort of transvection is continually being spread even
       among the common people, it is unnecessary to add further proof of it here. But we hope that this
       will suffice to refute those who either deny altogether that there are such transvections, or try to
       maintain that they are only imaginary or phantastical. And, indeed, it would be a matter of small
       importance if such men were left in their error, were it not that this error tends to the damage of the
       Faith. For notice that, not content with that error, they do not fear to maintain and publish others
       also, to the increase of witches and the detriment of the Faith. For they assert that all the witchcraft
       which is truly and actually ascribed to witches as instruments of the devil is only so ascribed in
       imagination and illusion, as if they were really harmless, just as their transvection is only
       phantastic. And for this reason many witches remain unpunished, to the great dispraise of the
       Creator, and to their own most heavy increase.
             The arguments on which they base their fallacy cannot be conceded. For first they advance
       the chapter of the Canon (Episcopi, 26, q. 5), where it is said that witches are only transported in
       imagination; but who is so foolish as to conclude from this that they cannot also be bodily
       transported? Similarly at the end of that chapter it is set down that whoever believes that a man can
       be changed for the better or the worse, or can be transformed into another shape, is to be thought
       worse than an infidel or a pagan; but who could conclude from this that men cannot be
       transformed into beasts by a glamour, or that they cannot be changed from health to sickness and
       from better to worse? They who so scratch at the surface of the words of the Canon hold an
       opinion which is contrary to that of all the holy Doctors, and, indeed, against the teaching of the
       Holy Scripture.
             For the contrary opinion is abundantly proved by what has been written in various places in
       the First Part of this treatise; and it is necessary to study the inner meaning of the words of the
       Canon. And this was examined in the First Question of the First Part of the treatise, in refuting the
       second of three errors which are there condemned, and where it is said that four things are to be
       preached to the people. For they are transported both bodily and phantastically, as is proved by
       their own confessions, not only of those who have been burned, but also of others who have
       returned to penitence and the Faith.
             Among such there was the woman in the town of Breisach whom we asked whether they
       could be transported only in imagination, or actually in the body; and she answered that it was
       possible in both ways. For if they do not wish to be bodily transferred, but want to know all that is
       being done in a meeting of their companions, then they observe the following procedure. In the
       name of all the devils they lie down to sleep on their left side, and then a sort of bluish vapour
       comes from their mouth, through which they can clearly see what is happening. But if they wish to
       be bodily transported, they must observe the method which has been told.
             Besides, even if that Canon be understood in its bare meaning without any explanation, who


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a03b.html (1 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:03:19 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter III

       is so dense as to maintain on that account that all their witchcraft and injuries are phantastic and
       imaginary, when the contrary is evident to the senses of everybody? Especially since there are
       many species of superstition, namely, fourteen; among which the species of witches holds the
       highest degree in spells and injuries, and the species of Pythoness, to which they can be reduced,
       which is only able to be transported in imagination, holds the lowest degree.
             And we do not concede that their error can be substantiated by the Legends of S. Germain and
       certain others. For it was possible for the devils to lie down themselves by the side of the sleeping
       husbands, during the time when a watch was being kept on the wives, just as if they were sleeping
       with their husbands. And we do not say that this was done for any reverence felt for the Saint; but
       the case is put that the opposite of what is set down in the Legend may not be believed to be
       impossible.
             In the same way all other objections can be answered: that it is found that some witches are
       transported only in imagination, but that it is also found in the writings of the Doctors that many
       have been bodily transported. Whoever wishes may refer to Thomas of Brabant in his book about
       Bees, and he will find many wonderful things concerning both the imaginary and the bodily
       transvection of men.
                                                                 Page 2 of 2


                                                    Question I, Chapter IV

                                                      Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                         HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                 All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a03b.html (2 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:03:19 PM]
Notes

           “S. Germain.” Bishop of Auxerre, born circa 380; died at Ravenna, 31 July, 448. His body was
        brought back to Auxerre, and later there arose the celebrated Benedictine Abbey known as St.
        Germain’s.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2010.html [2002-01-20 12:03:19 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter IV


                                  THE
                          MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                       PART II, QUESTION I.
                                                          CHAPTER IV
             Here follows the Way whereby Witches copulate with those Devils known as Incubi.

             As to the method in which witches copulate with Incubus devils, six points are to be noted.
       First, as to the devil and the body which he assumes, of what element it is formed. Second, as to
       the act, whether it is always accompanied with the injection of semen received from some other
       man. Third, as to the time and place, whether one time is more favourable than another for this
       practice. Fourth, whether the act is visible to the women, and whether only those who were
       begotten in this way are so visited by devils. Fifth, whether it applies only to those who were
       offered to the devil at birth by midwives. Sixth, whether the actual venereal pleasure is greater or
       less in this act. And we will speak first of the matter and quality of the body which the devil
       assumes.
             It must be said that he assumes an aerial body, and that it is in some respects terrestrial, in so
       far as it has an earthly property through condensation; and this is explained as follows. The air
       cannot of itself take definite shape, except the shape of some other body in which it is included.
       And in that case it is not bound by its own limits, but by those of something else; and one part of
       the air continues into the next part. Therefore he cannot simply assume an aerial body as such.
             Know, moreover, that the air is in every way a most changeable and fluid matter: and a sign
       of this is the fact that when any have tried to cut or pierce with a sword the body assumed by a
       devil, they have not been able to; for the divided parts of the air at once join together again. From
       this it follows that air is in itself a very competent matter, but because it cannot take shape unless
       some other terrestrial matter is joined with it, therefore it is necessary that the air which forms the
       devil's assumed body should be in some way inspissated, and approach the property of the earth,
       while still retaining its true property as air. And devils and disembodied spirits can effect this
       condensation by means of gross vapours raised from the earth, and by collecting them together
       into shapes in which they abide, not as defilers of them, but only as their motive power which give
       to that body the formal appearance of life, in very much the same way as the soul informs the body
       to which it is joined. They are, moreover, in these assumed and shaped bodies like a sailor in a
       ship which the wind moves.
             So when it is asked of what sort is the body assumed by the devil, it is to be said that with
       regard to its material, it is one thing to speak of the beginning of its assumption, and another thing
       to speak of its end. For in the beginning it is just air; but in the end it is inspisated air, partaking of
       some of the properties of the earth. And all this the devils, with God's permission, can do of their
       own nature; for the spiritual nature is superior to the bodily. Therefore the bodily nature must obey
       the devils in respect of local motion, though not in respect of the assumption of natural shapes,
       either accidental or substantial, except in the case of some small creatures (and then only with the
       help of some other agent, as has been hinted before). But as to local motion, no shape is beyond
       their power; thus they can move them as they wish, in such circumstances as they will.

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a04a.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:20 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter IV

             From this there may arise an incidental question as to what should be thought when a good or
       bad Angel performs some of the functions of life by means of true natural bodies, and not in aerial
       bodies; as in the case of Balaam's ass, through which the Angel spoke, and when the devils take
       possession of bodies. It is to be said that those bodies are not called assumed, but occupied. See S.
       Thomas, II. 8, Whether Angels assume bodies. But let us keep strictly to our argument.
             In what way is it to be understood that devils talk with witches, see them, hear them, eat with
       them, and copulate with them? And this is the second part of this first difficulty.
             For the first, it is to be said that three things are required for true conversation: namely, lungs
       to draw in the air; and this is not only for the sake of producing sound, but also to cool the heart;
       and even mutes have this necessary quality.
             Secondly, it is necessary that some percussion be made of a body in the air, as a greater or
       less sound is made when one beats wood in the airs, or rings a bell. For when a substance that is
       susceptible to sound is struck by a sound-producing instrument, it gives out a sound according to
       its size, which is received in the air and multiplied to the ears of the hearer, to whom, if he is far
       off, it seems to come through space.
             Thirdly, a voice is required; and it may be said that what is called Sound in inanimate bodies
       is called Voice in living bodies. And here the tongue strikes the respirations of air against an
       instrument or living natural organ provided by God. And this is not a bell, which is called a sound,
       whereas this is a voice. And this third requisite may clearly be exemplified by the second; and I
       have set this down that preachers may have a method of teaching the people.
             And fourthly, it is necessary that he who forms the voice should mean to express by means of
       that voice some concept of the mind to someone else, and that he should himself understand what
       he is saying; and so manage his voice by successively striking his teeth with his tongue in his
       mouth, by opening and shutting his lips, and by sending the air struck in his mouth into the outer
       air, that in this way the sound is reproduced in order in the ears of the hearer, who then
       understands his meaning.
             To return to the point. Devils have no lungs or tongue, though they can show the latter, as
       well as teeth and lips, artificially made according to the condition of their body; therefore they
       cannot truly and properly speak. But since they have understanding, and when they wish to express
       their meaning, then, by some disturbance of the air included in their assumed body, not of air
       breathed in and out as in the case of men, they produce, not voices, but sounds which have some
       likeness to voices, and send them articulately through the outside air to the ears of the hearer. And
       that the likeness of a voice can be made without respiration of air is clear from the case of other
       animals which do not breathe, but are said to made a sound, as do also certain other instruments, as
       Aristotle says in the de Anima. For certain fishes, when they are caught, suddenly utter a cry
       outside the water, and die.
             All this is applicable to what follows, so far as the point where we treat of the generative
       function, but not as regards good Angels. If anyone wishes to inquire further into the matter of
       devils speaking in possessed bodies, he may refer to S. Thomas in the Second Book of Sentences,
       dist. 8, art. 5. For in that case they use the bodily organs of the possessed body; since they occupy
       those bodies in respect of the limits of their corporeal quantity, but not in respect of the limits of
       their essence, either of the body or of the soul. Observe a distinction between substance and
       quantity, or accident. But this is impertinent.
             For now we must say in what manner they see and hear. Now sight is of two kinds, spiritual
       and corporeal, and the former infinitely excels the latter; for it can penetrate, and is not hindered
       by distance, owing to the faculty of light of which it makes use. Therefore it must be said that in

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a04a.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:20 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter IV

       no way does an Angel, either good or bad, see with the eyes of its assumed body, nor does it use
       any bodily property as it does in speaking, when it uses the air and the vibration of the air to
       produce sound which becomes reproduced in the ears of the hearer. Wherefore their eyes are
       painted eyes. And they freely appear to men in these likenesses that they may manifest to them
       their natural properties and converse with them spiritually by these means.
             For with this purpose the holy Angels have often appeared to the Fathers at the command of
       God and with His permission. And the bad angels manifest themselves to wicked men in order that
       men, recognizing their qualities, may associate themselves with them, here in sin, and elsewhere in
       punishment.
             S. Dionysius, at the end of his Celestial Hierarchy, says: In all parts of the human body the
       Angel teaches us to consider their properties: concluding that since corporeal vision is an operation
       of the living body through a bodily organ, which devils lack, therefore in their assumed bodies,
       just as they have the likeness of limbs, so that have the likeness of their functions.
             And we can speak in the same way of their hearing, which is far finer than that of the body;
       for it can know the concept of the mind and the conversation of the soul more subtly than can a
       man by hearing the mental concept through the medium of spoken words. See S. Thomas, the
       Second Book of Sentences, dist. 8. For if the secret wishes of a man are read in his face, and
       physicians can tell the thoughts of the heart from the heart-beats and the state of the pulse, all the
       more can such things be known by devils.
             And we may say as to eating, that in the complete act of eating there are four processes.
       Mastication in the mouth, swallowing into the stomach, digestion in the stomach, and fourthly,
       metabolism of the necessary nutriment and ejection of what is superflous. All Angels can perform
       the first two processes fo eating in their assumed bodies, but not the third and fourth; but instead of
       digesting and ejecting they have another power by which the food is suddenly dissolved in the
       surrounding matter. In Christ the process of eating was in all respects complete, since He had the
       nutritive and metabolistic powers; not, be it said, for the purpose of converting food into His own
       body, for those power were, like His body, glorified; so that the food was suddenly dissolved in
       His body, as when one throws water on to fire.

                         How in Modern Time Witches perform the Carnal Act with Incubus Devils,
                                      and how they are Multiplied by this Means.
             But no difficulty arises out of what has been said, with regard to our principal subject, which
       is the carnal act which Incubi in an assumed body perform with witches: unless perhaps anyone
       doubts whether modern witches practise such abominable coitus; and whether witches had their
       origin in this abomination.
             In answering these two doubts we shall say, as to the former of them, something of the
       activities of the witches who lived in olden times, about 1400 years before the Incarnation of Our
       Lord. It is, for example, unknown whether they were addicted to these filthy practises as modern
       witches have been since that time; for so far as we know history tells us nothing on this subject.
       But no one who reads the histories can doubt that there have always been witches, and that by their
       evil works much harm has been done to men, animals, and the fruits of the earth, and that Incubus
       and Succubus devils have always existed; for the traditions of the Canons and the holy Doctors
       have left and handed down to posterity many things concerning them through many hundreds of
       years. Yet there is this difference, that in times long past the Incubus devils used to infest women
       against their wills, as is often shown by Nider in his Formicarius, and by Thomas of Brabant in his

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a04a.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:20 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter IV

       book on the Universal Good, or on Bees.
             But the theory that modern witches are tainted with this sort of diabolic filthiness is not
       substantiated only in our opinion, since the expert testimony of the witches themselves has made
       all these things credible; and that they do not now, as in times past, subject themselves unwillingly,
       but willingly embrace this most foul and miserable servitude. For how many women have be left
       to be punished by secular law in various dioceses, especially in Constance and the town of
       Ratisbon, who have been for many years addicted to these abominations, some from their
       twentieth and some from their twelfth or thirteenth year, and always with a total or partial
       abnegation of the Faith? All the inhabitants of those places are witnesses of it. For without
       reckoning those who secretly repented, and those who returned to the Faith, no less than
       forty-eight have been burned in five years. And there was no question of credulity in accepting
       their stories because they turned to free repentance; for they all agreed in this, namely, that there
       were bound to indulge in these lewd practices in order that the ranks of their perfidy might be
       increased. But we shall treat of these individually in the Second Part of this work, where their
       particular deeds are described; omitting those which came under the notice of our colleague the
       Inquisitor of Como in the County of Burbia, who in the space of one year, which was the year of
       grace 1485, caused forty-one witches to be burned; who all publicly affirmed, as it is said, that
       they had practised these abominations with devils. Therefore this matter is fully substantiated by
       eye-witnesses, by hearsay, and the testimony of credible witnesses.
             As for the second doubt, whether witches had their origin from these abominations, we may
       say with S. Augustine that it is true that all the superstitious arts had their origin in a pestilent
       association of men with devils. For he says so in his work On the Christian Doctrine: All this sort
       of practices, whether of trifling or of noxious superstition, arose from some pestilent association of
       men with devils, as though some pact of infidel and guileful friendship had been formed, and they
       are all utterly to be repudiated. Notice here that it is manifest that, as there are various kinds of
       superstition or magic arts, and various societies of those who practise them; and as among the
       fourteen kinds of that art the species of witches is the worst, since they have not a tacit but an overt
       and expressed pact with the devil, and more than this, have to acknowledge a form of
       devil-worship through abjuring the Faith; therefore it follows that witches hold the worst kind of
       association with devils, with especial reference to the behaviour of women, who always delight in
       vain things.
                                                                 Page 1 of 2


                                       Question I, Chapter IV continued . . .

                                                      Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a04a.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:20 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter IV


                                  THE
                          MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                    PART II, QUESTION I.
                                                   CHAPTER IV CONTINUED

             Notice also S. Thomas, the Second Book of Sentences (dist. 4, art. 4), in the solution of an
       argument, where he asks whether those begotten in this way by devils are more powerful than
       other men. He answers that this is the truth, basing his belief not only on the text of Scripture in
       Genesis vi: And the same became the mighty men which were of old; but also on the following
       reason. Devils know how to ascertain the virtue in semen: first, by the temperament of him from
       whom the semen is obtained; secondly, by knowing what woman is most fitted for the reception of
       that semen; thirdly, by knowing what constellation is favourable to that corporeal effect; and we
       may add, fourthly, from their own words we learn that those whom they beget have the best sort of
       disposition for devil's work. When all these causes so concur, it is concluded that men born in this
       way are powerful and big in body.
             Therefore, in return to the question whether witches had their origin in these abominations,
       we shall say that they originated from some pestilent mutual association with devils, as is clear
       from our first knowledge of them. But no one can affirm with certainty that they did not increase
       and multiply by means of these foul practices, although devils commit this deed for the sake not of
       pleasure but of corruption. And this appears to be the order of the process. A Succubus devil draws
       the semen from a wicked man; and if he is that man's own particular devil, and does not wish to
       make himself an Incubus to a witch, he passes that semen on to the devil deputed to a woman or
       witch; and this last, under some constellation that favours his purpose that the man or woman so
       born should be strong in the practice of witchcraft, becomes the Incubus to the witch.
             And it is no objection that those of whom the text speaks were not witches but only giants and
       famous and powerful men; for, as was said before, witchcraft was not perpetuated in the time of
       the law of Nature, because of the recent memory of the Creation of the world, which left no room
       for Idolatry. But when the wickedness of man began to increase, the devil found more opportunity
       to disseminate this kind of perfidy. Nevertheless, it is not to be understood that those who were
       said to be famous men were necessarily so called by reason of their good virtues.

        Whether the Relations of an Incubus Devil with a Witch are always accompanied by the Injection
                                                  of Semen.
             To this question it is answered that the devil has a thousand ways and means of inflicting
       injury, and from the time of his first Fall has tried to destroy the unity of the Church, and in every
       way to subvert the human race. Therefore no infallible rule can be stated as to this matter, but there
       is this probable distinction: that a witch is either old and sterile, or she is not. And if she is, then he
       naturally associates with the witch without the injection of semen, since it would be of no use, and
       the devil avoids superfluity in his operations as far as he can. But if she is not sterile, he
       approaches her in the way of carnal delectation which is procured for the witch. And should be
       disposed to pregnancy, then if he can conveniently possess the semen extracted from some man, he

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a04b.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:21 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter IV

       does not delay to approach her with it for the sake of infecting her progeny.
            But it is asked whether he is able to collect the semen emitted in some nocturnal pollution in
       sleep, just as he collects that which is spent in the carnal act, the answer is that it is probably that
       he cannot, though others hold a contrary opinion. For it must be noted that, as has been said, the
       devils pay attention to the generative virtue of the semen, and such virtue is more abundant and
       better preserved in semen obtained by the carnal act, being wasted in the semen that is due to
       nocturnal pollutions in sleep, which arises only from the superfluity of the humours and is not
       emitted with so great generative virtue. Therefore it is believed that he does not make use of such
       semen for the generation of progeny, unless perhaps he knows that the necessary virtue is present
       in that semen.
            But this also cannot altogether be denied, that even in the case of a married witch who has
       been impregnated by her husband, the devil can, by the commixture of another semen, infect that
       which has been conceived.

              Whether the Incubus operates more at one Time than another: and similarly of the Place.

             To the question whether the devil observes times and places it is to be said that, apart from his
       observation of certain times and constellations when his purpose is to effect the pollution of the
       progeny, he also observes certain times when his object is not pollution, but the causing of
       venereal pleasure on the part of the witch; and these are the most sacred times of the whole year,
       such as Christmas, Easter, Pentacost, and other Feast days.
             And the devils do this for three reasons. First, that in this way witches may become imbued
       not only with the vice of perfidy through apostasy from the Faith, but also with that of Sacrilege,
       and that the greater offence may be done to the Creator, and the heavier damnation rest upon the
       souls of the witches.
             The second reason is that when God is so heavily offended, He allows them greater power of
       injuring even innocent men by punishing them either in their affairs or their bodies. For when it is
       said: “The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father,” etc., this refers only to eternal punishment,
       for very often the innocent are punished with temporal afflictions on account of the sins of others.
       Wherefore in another place God says: “I am a mighty and jealous God, visiting the sins of the
       fathers unto the third and fourth generation.” Such punishment was exemplified in the children of
       the men of Sodom, who were destroyed for their fathers' sins.
             The third reason is that they have greater opportunity to observe many people, especially
       young girls, who on Feast Days are more intent on idleness and curiosity, and are therefore more
       easily seduced by old witches. And the following happened in the native country of one of us
       Inquisitors (for there are two of us collaborating in this work).
             A certain young girl, a devout virgin, was solicited one Feast Day by an old woman to go
       with her upstairs to a room where there were some very beautiful young men. And when she
       consented, and as they were going upstairs with the old woman leading the way, she warned the
       girl not to make the sign of the Cross. And though she agreed to this, yet she secretly crossed
       herself. Consequently it happened that, when they had gone up, the virgin saw no one, because the
       devils who were there were unable to show themselves in assumed bodies to that virgin. And the
       old woman cursed her, saying: Depart in the name of all the devils; why did you cross yourself?
       This I had from the frank relation of that good and honest maiden.
             A fourth reason can be added, namely, that they can in this way more easily seduce men, by
       causing them to think that if God permits such things to be done at the most holy times, it cannot

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a04b.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:21 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter IV

       be such a heavy sin as if He did not permit them at such times.
             With regard to the question whether the favour one place more than another, it is to be said
       that it is proved by the words and actions of witches that they are quite unable to commit these
       abominations in sacred places. And in this can be seen the efficacy of the Guardian Angels, that
       such places are reverenced. And further, witches assert that they never have any peace except at
       the time of Divine Service when they are present in the church; and therefore they are the first to
       enter and the last to leave the church. Nevertheless, they are bound to observe certain other
       abominable ceremonies at the command of the devils, such as to spit on the ground at the
       Elevation of the Host, or to utter, either verbally or otherwise, the filthiest thoughts, as: I wish you
       were in such or such a place. This matter is touched upon in the Second Part.

          Whether Incubi and Succubi Commit this Act Visibly on the part of the Witch, or on the part of
                                                Bystanders.
             As to whether they commit these abominations together visibly or invisibly, it is to be said
       that, in all the cases of which we have had knowledge, the devil has always operated in a form
       visible to the witch; for there is no need for him to approach her invisibly, because of the pact of
       federation with him that has been expressed. But with regard to any bystanders, the witches
       themselves have often been seen lying on their backs in the fields or the woods, naked up to the
       very navel, and it has been apparent from the disposition of those limbs and members which
       pertain to the venereal act and orgasm, as also from the agitation of their legs and thighs, that, all
       invisibly to the bystanders, they have been copulating with Incubus devils; yet sometimes, howbeit
       this is rare, at the end of the act a very black vapour, of about the stature of a man, rises up into the
       air from the witch. And the reason is that that Schemer knows that he can in this way seduce or
       pervert the minds of girls or other men who are standing by. But of these matters, and how they
       have been performed in many places, in the town of Ratisbon, and on the estate of the nobles of
       Rappolstein, and in certain other countries, we will treat in the Second Part.
             It is certain also that the following has happened. Husbands have actually seen Incubus devils
       swiving their wives, although they have thought that they were not devils but men. And when they
       have taken up a weapon and tried to run them through, the devil has suddenly disappeared, making
       himself invisible. And then their wives have thrown their arms around them, although they have
       sometimes been hurt, and railed at their husbands, mocking them, and asking them if they had
       eyes, or whether they were possessed of devils.

       That Incubus Devils do not Infest only those Women who have been Begotten by their Filthy Deeds
        or those who have been Offered to them by Midwives, but All Indifferently with Greater or Less
                                              Venereal Delectation.
            In conclusion, finally, it can be said that these Incubus devils will not only infest those
       women who have been generated by means of such abominations, or those who have been offered
       to them by midwives, but that they try with all their might, by means of witches who are bawds or
       hot whores, to seduce all the devout and chaste maidens in that whole district or town. For this is
       well known by the constant experience of Magistrates; and in the town of Ratisbon, when certain
       witches were burned, these wretches affirmed, before their final sentence, that they had been
       commanded by their Masters to use ever endeavour to effect the subversion of pious maids and
       widows.


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a04b.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:21 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter IV

             If it be asked: Whether the venereal delectation is greater or less with the Incubus devils in
       assumed bodies than it is in like circumstances with men in a true physical body, we may say this:
       It seems that, although the pleasure should naturally be greater when like disports with like, yet
       that cunning Enemy can so bring together the active and passive elements, not indeed naturally,
       but in such qualities of warmth and temperament, that he seems to excite no less degree of
       concupiscence. But this matter will be discussed more fully later with reference to the qualities of
       the feminine sex.
                                                                 Page 2 of 2


                                                    Question I, Chapter V

                                                      Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a04b.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:21 PM]
Notes

           “Generation.” “Exodus” xx, 5: xxxiv, 7.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2011.html [2002-01-20 12:03:21 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter V


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                       PART II, QUESTION I.
                                                          CHAPTER V
Witches commonly perform their Spells through the Sacraments of the Church. And how they Impair the
Powers of Generation, and how they may Cause other Ills to happen to God's Creatures of all kinds. But
                     herein we except the Question of the Influence of the Stars.

             But now there are several things to be noted concerning their methods of bringing injury upon
       other creatures of both sexes, and upon the fruits of the earth: first with regard to men, then with
       regard to beasts, and thirdly with regard to the fruits of the earth. And as to men, first, how they
       can cast an obstructive spell on the procreant forces, and even on the venereal act, so that a woman
       cannot conceive, or a man cannot perform the act. Secondly, how that act is obstructed sometimes
       with regard to one woman but not another. Thirdly, how they take away the virile member as
       though it were altogether torn away from the body. Fourthly, if it is possible to distinguish whether
       any of the above injuries have been caused by a devil on his own account, or if it has been through
       the agency of a witch. Fifthly, how witches change men and women into beasts by some prestige
       or glamour. Sixthly, how witch midwives in various ways kill that which has been conceived in
       the mother's womb; and when they do not do this, offer the children to devils. And lest these things
       should seem incredible, they have been proved in the First Part of this work by questions and
       answers to arguments; to which, if necessary, the doubtful reader may turn back for the purpose of
       investigating the truth.
             For the present our object is only to adduce actual facts and examples which have been found
       by us, or have been written by others in detestation of so great a crime, to substantiate those former
       arguments in case they should be difficult for anyone to understand; and, by those things that are
       related in this Second Part, to bring back to the Faith and away from their error those who think
       there are no witches, and that no witchcraft can be done in the world.
             And with regard to the first class of injuries with which they afflict the human race, it is to be
       noted that, apart from the methods by which they injure other creatures, they have six ways of
       injuring humanity. And one is, to induce an evil love in a man for a woman, or in a woman for a
       man. The second is to plant hatred or jealousy in anyone. The third is to bewitch them so that a
       man cannot perform the genital act with a woman, or conversely a woman with a man; or by
       various means to procure an abortion, as has been said before. The fourth is to cause some disease
       in any of the human organs. The fifth, to take away life. The sixth, to deprive them of reason.
             In this connexion it should be said that, saving the influence of the stars, the devils can by
       their natural power in every way cause real defects and infirmities, and this by their natural
       spiritual power, which is superior to any bodily power. For no one infirmity is quite like another,
       and this is equally true of natural defects in which there is no physical infirmity. Therefore they
       proceed by different methods to cause each different infirmity or defect. And of those we shall
       give instances in the body of this work as the necessity arises.
             But first, lest the reader's mind should be kept in any doubt as to why they have no power to

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a05a.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:22 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter V

       alter the influence of the stars, we shall say that there is a threefold reason. First, the stars are
       above them even in the region of punishment, which is the region of the lower mists; and this by
       reason of the duty which is assigned to them. See the First Part, Question II, where we dealt with
       Incubus and Succubus devils.
             The second reason is that the stars are governed by the good Angels. See many places
       concerning the Powers which move the stars, and especially S. Thomas, part I, quest. 90. And in
       this matter the Philosophers agree with the Theologians.
             Thirdly, it is on account of the general order and common good of the Universe. which would
       suffer general detriment if evil spirits were allowed to cause any alteration in the influence of the
       stars. Wherefore those changes which were miraculously caused in the Old or New Testament
       were done by God through the good Angels; as, for example, when the sun stood still for Joshua,
       or when it went backward for Hezekiah, or when it was supernaturally darkened at the Passion of
       Christ. But in all other matters, with God's permission, they can work their spells, either the devils
       themselves, or devils through the agency of witches; and, in fact, it is evident that they do so.
             Secondly, it is to be noted that in all their methods of working injury they nearly always
       instruct witches to make their instruments of witchcraft by means of the Sacraments or
       sacramental things of the Church, or some holy thing consecrated to God: as when they sometimes
       place a waxen image under the Altar-cloth, or draw a thread through the Holy Chrism, or use some
       other consecrated thing in such a way. And there are three reasons for this.
             For a similar reason they are wont to practise their witchcraft at the more sacred time of the
       year, especially at the Advent of Our Lord, and at Christmas. First, that by such means they may
       make men guilty of not only perfidy, but also sacrilege, by contaminating whatever is divine in
       them; and that so they may the more deeply offend God their Creator, damn their own souls, and
       cause many more to rush into sin.
             Secondly, that God, being so heavily offended by men, may grant the devil greater power of
       tormenting them. For so says S. Gregory, that in His anger He sometimes grants the wicked their
       prayers and petitions, which He mercifully denies to others. And the third reason is that, by the
       seeming appearance of good, he may more easily deceive certain simple men, who think that they
       have performed some pious act and obtained the grace from God, whereas they have only sinned
       the more heavily.
             A fourth reason also can be added touching the more sacred seasons and the New Year. For,
       according to S. Augustine, there are other mortal sins besides adultery by which the observance of
       the Festivals may be infringed. Superstition, moreover, and witchcraft arising from the most
       servile operations of the devil are contrary to the reverence that is due to God. Therefore, as has
       been said, he causes a man to fall more deeply, and the Creator is the more offended.
             And of the New Year we may say, according to S. Isidore, Etym. VIII. 2, that Janus, from
       whom the month of January is named, which also begins on the Day of Circumcision, was an idol
       with two faces, as if one were the end of the old year and the other the beginning of the new, and,
       as it were, the protector and auspicious author of the coming year. And in honour of him, or rather
       of the devil in the form of that idol, the Pagans made much boisterous revelry, and were very
       merry among themselves, holding various dances and feasts. And concerning these Blessed
       Augustine makes mention in many places, and gives a very ample description of them in his
       Twenty-sixth Book.
             And now bad Christians imitate these corruptions, turning them to lasciviousness when the
       run about at the time of Carnival with masks and jests and other superstitions. Similarly witches


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a05a.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:22 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter V

       use these revelries of the devil for their own advantage, and work their spells about the time of the
       New Year in respect of the Divine Offices and Worship; as on S. Andrew's Day and at Christmas.
             And now, as to how they work their witchcraft, first by means of the Sacraments, and then by
       means of sacramental objects, we will refer to a few known facts, discovered by us in the
       Inquisition.
             In a town which it is better not to names, for the sake of charity and expediency, when a
       certain witch received the Body of Our Lord, she suddenly lowered her head, as is the detestable
       habit of women, placed her garment near her mouth, and taking the Body of the Lord out of her
       mouth, wrapped it in a handkerchief; and afterwards, at the suggestion of the devil, placed it in a
       pot in which there was a toad, and hid it in the ground near her house by the storehouse, together
       with several other things, by means of which she had to work her witchcraft. But with the help of
       God's mercy this great crime was detected and brought to light. For on the following day a
       workman was going on his business near that house, and heard a sound like a child crying; and
       when he had come near to the stone under which the pot had been hidden, he heard it much more
       clearly, and thinking that some child have been buried there by the woman, went to the Mayor or
       chief magistrate, and told him what had been done, as he thought, by the infanticide. And the
       Mayor quickly send his servants and found it to be as he had said. But they were unwilling to
       exhume the child, thinking it wiser to place a watch and wait to see if any woman came near the
       place; for they did not know that it was the Lord's Body that was hidden there. And so it happened
       that the same witch came to the place, and secretly hid to pot under her garment before their eyes.
       And when she was taken and questioned, she discovered her crime, saying that the Lord's Body
       had been hidden in the pot with a toad, so that by means of their dust she might be able to cause
       injuries at her will to men and other creatures.
             It is also to be noted that when witches communicate they observe this custom, that, when
       they can do so without being noticed, they receive the Lord's Body under their tongue instead of
       on the top. And as far as can be seen, the reason is that they never wish to receive any remedy that
       might counteract their abjuration of the Faith, either by Confession or by receiving the Sacrament
       of the Eucharist; and secondly, because in this way it is easier for them to take the Lord's Body out
       of their mouths so that they can apply it, as has been said, to their own uses, to the greater offence
       of the Creator.
             For this reason all rectors of the Church and those who communicate the people are enjoined
       to take the utmost care when they communicate women that the mouth shall be well open and the
       tongue thrust well out, and their garments be kept quite clear. And the more care is taken in this
       respect, the more witches become known by this means.
             Numberless other superstitions they practise by means of sacramental objects. Sometimes
       they place a waxen image or some aromatic substance under the altar cloth, as we said before, and
       then hide it under the threshold of a house, so that the person for whom it is placed there may be
       bewitched on crossing over it. Countless instances could be brought forward, but these minor sorts
       of spells are proved by the greater.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a05a.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:22 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter V

                                                    Question I, Chapter VI

                                                      Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a05a.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:22 PM]
Notes

            “Carnival.” These Pagan practices are sternly reprobated in the “Liber Poenitentialis” of S.
        Theodore, seventh Archbishop of Canterbury. In Book XXXVII is written: “If anyone at the
        Kalends of January goeth about as a stag or a bull-calf, that is, making himself into a wild animal,
        and dressing in the skins of a herd animal, and putting on the heads of beast; those who in such
        wise transform themselves into the appearance of a wild animal, let them do penance for three
        years, because this is devilish.” See my “Geography of Witchcraft,” Chap. II, pp. 65-73. The
        Council of Auxerre in 578 (or 585) forbade anyone “to masquerade as a bull-calf or a stag on the
        first of January or to distribute devilish charms.”




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2012.html [2002-01-20 12:03:22 PM]
Notes

            “Witchcraft.” It is not unusual for Satanists to go to Holy Communion in various churchs of a
        town, and instead of consuming the Host they spit God's Body from their mouths into a
        handkerchief or cloth and take it away to abuse in their horrid worship. In the notorious case of
        the Lancashire witches, at the first trial, 1612, James Device confessed “that upon Sheare
        Thursday was two yeares, his Grand-Mother Elizabeth Souternes alias Demdike, did bid him this
        Examinate goe to the Church to receive the Communion (they next day after being Good Friday),
        and then not to eate the Bread the Minister gave him, but to bring it and deliver it to such a thing
        as should meet him in his way homewards; Notwithstanding her perswasions thie Examinate did
        eate the Bread: and so in his comming homeward some fortie roodes off the said Church, there
        met him a thing in the shape of a Hare, who spoke unto this Examinate, and asked him whether he
        had brought the Bread.”
            The toad constantly appears as a familiar. In 1579 at Windsor “one Mother Dutton dwellyng in
        Cleworthe Parishe keepeth a Spirite or Feende in the likenesses of a Toade, and fedeth the same
        Feende lying in a border of greene Hearbes, within her garden, with blood whiche she causeth to
        issue from her owne flancke.” Ursley Kemp, a S. Osyth witch (1582), had a familiar, Pygine,
        “black like a Toad.” Ales Hunt of the same coven nourished two familiars, “the which she kept in
        a little lowe earthen pot.” Margerie Sammon, another S. Osyth's witch, “hath also two spirites like
        Toades, the one called ‘Tom,’ and the other ‘Robbyn.’” When Ursley Kemp peeped through
        Mother Hunt's window she “espied a spirite to looke out of a porcharde from under a clothe, the
        nose thereof being brown like unto a Ferret.”




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2013.html [2002-01-20 12:03:22 PM]
Notes

           “Altar-Cloth.” These practices still survive.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2014.html [2002-01-20 12:03:22 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter VI


                                  THE
                          MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                       PART II, QUESTION I.
                                                          CHAPTER VI
                              How Witches Impede and Prevent the Power of Procreation.

             Concerning the method by which they obstruct the procreant function both in men and
       animals, and in both sexes, the reader my consult that which has been written already on the
       question, Whether devils can through witches turn the minds of men to love or hatred. There, after
       the solutions of the arguments, a specific declaration is made relating to the method by which, with
       God's permission, they can obstruct the procreant function.
             But it must be noted that such obstruction is caused both intrinsically and extrinsically.
       Intrinsically they cause it in two ways. First, when they directly prevent the erection of the
       member which is accomodated to fructification. And this need not seem impossible, when it is
       considered that they are able to vitiate the natural use of any member. Secondly, when they prevent
       the flow of the vital essences to the members in which resides the motive force, closing up the
       seminal ducts so that it does not reach the generative vessels, or so that it cannot be ejaculated, or
       is fruitlessly spilled.
             Extrinsically they cause it at times by means of images, or by the eating of herbs; sometimes
       by other external means, such as cocks' testicles. But it must not be thought that it is by the virtue
       of these things that a man is made impotent, but by the occult power of devils' illusions witches by
       this means procure such impotence, namely, that they cause man to be unable to copulate, or a
       woman to conceive.
             And the reason for this is that God allows them more power over this act, by which the first
       sin was disseminated, than over other human actions. Similarly they have more power over
       serpents, which are the most subject to the influence of incantations, than over other animals.
       Wherefore it has often been found by us and other Inquisitors that they have caused this
       obstruction by means of serpents or some such things.
             For a certain wizard who had been arrested confessed that for many years he had by
       witchcraft brought sterility upon all the men and animals which inhabited a certain house.
       Moreover, Nider tells of a wizard named Stadlin who was taken in the diocese of Lausanne, and
       confessed that in a certain house where a man and his wife were loving, he had by his witchcraft
       successively killed in the woman's womb seven children, so that for many years the woman always
       miscarried. And that, in the same way, he had caused that all the pregnant cattle and animals of the
       house were during those years unable to give birth to any live issue. And when he was questioned
       as to how he had done this, and what manner of charge should be preferred against him, he
       discovered his crime, saying: I put a serpent under the threshold of the outer door of the house; and
       if this is removed, fecundity will be restored to the inhabitants. And it was as he said; for though
       the serpent was not found, having been reduced to dust, the whole piece of ground was removed,
       and in the same year fecundity was restored to the wife and to all the animals.
             Another instance occurred hardly four years ago in Reichshofen. There was a most notorious

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a06a.html (1 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:03:23 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter VI

       witch, who could at all times and by a mere touch bewitch women and cause an abortion. Now the
       wife of a certain nobleman in that place had become pregnant and had engaged a midwife to take
       care of her, and had been warned by the midwife not to go out of the castle, and above all to be
       careful not to hold any speech or conversation with that witch. After some weeks, unmindful of
       that warning, she went out of the castle to visit some women who were met together on some
       festive occasion; and when she had sat down for a little, the witch came, and, as if for the purpose
       of saluting her, placed both her hands on her stomach; and suddenly she felt the child moving in
       pain. Frightened by this, she returned home and told the midwife what had happened. Then the
       midwife exclaimed: “Alas! you have already lost your child.” And so it proved when her time
       came; for she gave birth, not to an entire abortion, but little by little to separate fragments of its
       head and feet and hands. And the great affliction was permitted by God to punish her husband,
       whose duty it was to bring witches to justice and avenge their injuries to the Creator.
             And there was in the town of Mersburg in the diocese of Constance a certain young man who
       was bewitched in such a way that he could never perform the carnal act with any woman except
       one. And many have heard him tell that he had often wished to refuse that woman, and take flight
       to other lands; but that hitherto he had been compelled to rise up in the night and to come very
       quickly back, sometimes over land, and sometimes through the air as if he were flying.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                   Question I, Chapter VII

                                                      Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a06a.html (2 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:03:23 PM]
Notes

           “Stadlin.” “Formicarius,” c. III.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2015.html [2002-01-20 12:03:23 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter VII


                                  THE
                          MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                       PART II, QUESTION I.
                                                          CHAPTER VII
                                   How, as it were, they Deprive Man of his Virile Member.

             We have already shown that they can take away the male organ, not indeed by actually
       despoiling the human body of it, in the manner which we have already declared. And of this we
       shall instance a few examples.
             In the town of Ratisbon a certain young man who had an intrigue with a girl, wishing to leave
       her, lost his member; that is to say, some glamour was cast over it so that he could see or touch
       nothing but his smooth body. In his worry over this he went to a tavern to drink wine; and after he
       had sat there for a while he got into conversation with another woman who was there, and told her
       the cause of his sadness, explaining everything, and demonstrating in his body that it was so. The
       woman was astute, and asked whether he suspected anyone; and when he named such a one,
       unfolding the whole matter, she said: “If persuasion is not enough, you must use some violence, to
       induce her to restore to you your health.” So in the evening the young man watched the way by
       which the witch was in the habit of going, and finding her, prayed her to restore to him the health
       of his body. And when she maintained that she was innocent and knew nothing about it, he fell
       upon her, and winding a towel tightly about her neck, choked her, saying: “Unless you give me
       back my health, you shall die at my hands.” Then she, being unable to cry out, and growing black,
       said: “Let me go, and I will heal you.” The young man then relaxed the pressure of the towel, and
       the witch touched him with her hand between the thighs, saying: “Now you have what you desire.”
       And the young man, as he afterwards said, plainly felt, before he had verified it by looking or
       touching, that his member had been restored to him by the mere touch of the witch.
             A similar experience is narrated by a certain venerable Father from the Dominican House of
       Spires, well known in the Order for the honest of his life and for his learning. “One day,” he says,
       “while I was hearing confessions, a young man came to me and, in the course of his confession,
       woefully said that he had lost his member. Being astonished at this, and not being willing to give it
       easy credence, since the opinion of the wise it is a mark of light-heartedness to believe too easily, I
       obtained proof of it when I saw nothing on the young man's removing his clothes and showing the
       place. Then, using the wisest counsel I could, I asked whether he suspected anyone of having so
       bewitched him. And the young man said that he did suspect someone, but that she was absent and
       living in Worms. Then I said: ‘I advise you to go to her as soon as possible and try your utmost to
       soften her with gentle words and promises’; and he did so. For he came back after a few days and
       thanked me, saying that he was whole and had recovered everything. And I believed his words, but
       again proved them by the evidence of my eyes.”
             But there are some points to be noted for the clearer understanding of what has already been
       written concerning this matter. First, it must in no way be believed that such members are really
       torn right away from the body, but that they are hidden by the devil through some prestidigitory art
       so that they can be neither seen nor felt. And this is proved by the authorities and by argument;

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a07a.html (1 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:23 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter VII

       although is has been treated of before, where Alexander of Hales says that a Prestige, properly
       understood, is an illusion of the devil, which is not caused by any material change, but exists only
       in the perceptions of him who is deluded, either in his interior or exterior senses.
              With reference to these words it is to be noted that, in the case we are considering, two of the
       exterior senses, namely, those of sight and touch, are deluded, and not the interior senses, namely,
       common-sense, fancy, imagination, thought, and memory. (But S. Thomas says they are only four,
       as has been told before, reckoning fancy and imagination as one; and with some reason, for there is
       little difference between imagining and fancying. See S. Thomas, I, 79.) And these senses, and not
       only the exterior senses, are affected when it is not a case of hiding something, but the causing
       something to appear to a man either when he is aware or asleep.
              As when a man who is awake sees things otherwise than as they are; such as seeing someone
       devour a horse with its rider, or thinking he sees a man transformed into a beast, or thinking that he
       is himself a beast and must associate with beasts. For then the exterior senses are deluded and are
       employed by the interior senses. For by the power of devils, with God's permission, mental images
       long retained in the treasury of such images, which is the memory, are drawn out, not from the
       intellectual understanding in which such images are stored, but from the memory, which is the
       repository of mental images, and is situated at the back of the head, and are presented to the
       imaginative faculty. And so strongly are they impressed on that faculty that a man has an
       inevitable impulse to imagine a horse or a beast, when the devil draws from the memory an image
       of a horse or a beast; and so he is compelled to think that he sees with his external eyes such a
       beast when there is actually no such beast to see; but it seems to be so by reason of the impulsive
       force of the devil working by means of those images.
              And it need not seem wonderful that devils can do this, when even a natural defect is able to
       effect the same result, as is shown in the case of frantic and melancholy men, and in maniacs and
       some drunkards, who are unable to discern truly. For frantic men think they see marvellous things,
       such as beasts and other horrors, when in actual fact they see nothing. See above, in the question,
       Whether witches can turn the minds of men to love and hatred; where many thing are noted.
              And, finally, the reason is self-evident. For since the devil has power over inferior things,
       except only the soul, therefore he is able to effect certain changes in those things, when God
       allows, so that things appear to be otherwise than they are. And this he does, as I have said, either
       by confusing and deluding the organ of sight so that a clear thing appears cloudy; just as after
       weeping, owing to the collected humours, the light appears to different from what it was before. Or
       by operating on the imaginative faculty by a transmutation of mental images, as has been said. Or
       by some agitation of various humours, so that matters which are earthy and dry seem to be fire or
       water: as some people make everyone in the house strip themselves naked under the impression
       that they are swimming in water.
              It may be asked further with reference to the above method of devils, whether this sort of
       illusions can happen indifferently to the good and to the wicked: just as other bodily infirmities
       can, as will be shown later, be brought by witches even upon those who are in a state of grace. To
       this question, following the words of Cassian in his Second Collation of the Abbot Sirenus, we
       must answer that they cannot. And from this it follows that all who are deluded in this way are
       presumed to be in deadly sin. For he says, as is clear from the words of S. Antony: The devil can
       in no way enter the mind or body of any man, nor has the power to penetrate into the thoughts of
       anybody, unless such a person has first become destitute of all holy thoughts, and is quite bereft
       and denuded of spiritual contemplation.


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a07a.html (2 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:23 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter VII

             This agrees with Boethius where he says in the Consolation of Philosophy: We had given you
       such arms that, if you had not thrown them away, you would have been preserved from infirmity.
             Also Cassian tells in the same place of two Pagan witches, each in his own way malicious,
       who by their witchcraft sent a succession of devils into the cell of S. Antony for the purpose of
       driving him from there by their temptations; being infected with hatred for the holy man because a
       great number of people visited him every day. And though these devils assailed him with the
       keenest of spurs to his thoughts, yet he drove them away by crossing himself on the forehead and
       breast, and by prostrating himself in earnest prayer.
             Therefore we may say that all who are so deluded by devils, not reckoning any other bodily
       infirmities, are lacking in the gift of divine grace. And so it is said in Tobias vi: The devil has
       power against those who are subject to their lusts.
             This is also substantiated by what we told in the First Part in the question, Whether witches
       can change men into the shapes of beasts. For we told of a girl who was turned into a filly, as she
       herself and, except S. Macharius, all who looked at her were persuaded. But the devil could not
       deceive the senses of the holy man; and when she was brought to him to be healed, he saw true
       woman and not a horse, while on the other hand everyone else exclaimed that she seemed to be a
       horse. And the Saint, by his prayers, freed her and the others from that illusion, saying that this had
       happened to her because she had not attended sufficiently to holy things, nor used as she should
       Holy Confession and the Eucharist. And for this reason, because in her honesty she would not
       consent to the shameful proposal of a young man, who had caused a Jew who was a witch to
       bewitch the girl so that, by the power of the devil, he turned her into a filly.
             We may summarize our conclusions as follows: - Devils can, for their profit and probation,
       injure the good in their fortunes, that is, in such exterior things as riches, fame, and bodily health.
       This is clear from the case of the Blessed Job, who was afflicted by the devil in such matters. But
       such injuries are not of their own causing, so that they cannot be led or driven into any sin,
       although they can be tempted both inwardly and outwardly in the flesh. But the devils cannot
       afflict the good with this sort of illusions, either actively or passively.
             Not actively, but deluding their senses as they do those of others who are not in a state of
       grace. And not passively, by taking away their male organs by some glamour. For in these two
       respects they could never injure Job, especially in regard to the venereal act; for he was of such
       continence that he was able to say: I have vowed a vow with my eyes that I shall never think about
       a virgin, and still less about another man's wife. Nevertheless the devil knows that he has great
       power over sinners (see S. Luke xi: When a strong man armed keepeth his palace, his goods are in
       peace).
             But it may be asked, as to illusions in respect of the male organ, whether, granted that the
       devil cannot impose this illusion on those in a state of grace in a passive way, he cannot still do so
       in an active sense: the argument being that the man in a state of grace is deluded because he ought
       to see the member in its right place, when he who thinks it has been taken away from him, as well
       as other bystanders, does not see in in its place; but if this is conceded, it seems to be contrary to
       what has been said. It can be said that there is not so much force in the active as in the passive loss;
       meaning by active loss, not his who bears the loss, but his who sees the loss from without, as is
       self-evident. Therefore, although a man in a state of grace can se the loss of another, and to that
       extent the devil can delude his senses; yet he cannot passively suffer such loss in his own body, as,
       for example, to be deprived of his member, since he is not subject to list. In the same way the
       converse is true, as the Angel said to Tobias: Those who are given to lust, the devil has power over


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a07a.html (3 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:23 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter VII

       them.
             And what, then, is to be thought of those witches who in this way sometimes collect male
       organs in great numbers, as many as twenty or thirty members together, and put them in a bird's
       nest, or shut them up in a box, where they move themselves like living members, and eat oats and
       corn, as has been seen by many and is a matter of common report? It is to be said that it is all done
       by devil's work and illusion, for the senses of those who see them are deluded in the way we have
       said. For a certain man tells that, when he had lost his member, he approached a known witch to
       ask her to restore it to him. She told the afflicted man to climb a certain tree, and that he might take
       which he liked out of the nest in which there were several members. And when he tried to take a
       big one, the witch said: You must not take that one; adding, because it belongs to a parish priest.
             All these things are caused by devils through an illusion or glamour, in the manner we have
       said, by confusing the organ of vision by transmuting the mental images in the imaginative faculty.
       And it must not be said that these members which are shown are devils in assumed members, just
       as they sometimes appear to witches and men in assumed aerial bodies, and converse with them.
       And the reason is that they effect this thing by an easier method, namely, by drawing out an inner
       mental image from the repository of the memory, and impressing it on the imagination.
             And if anyone wishes to say that they could go to work in a similar way, when they are said
       to converse with witches and other men in assumed bodies; that is, that they could cause such
       apparitions by changing the mental images in the imaginative faculty, so that when men thought
       the devils were present in assumed bodies, they were really nothing but an illusions caused by such
       a change of the mental images in the inner perceptions.
             It is to be said that, if the devil had no other purpose than merely to show himself in human
       form, then there would be no need for him to appear in an assumed body, since he could effect his
       purpose well enough by the aforesaid illusion. But this is not so; for he has another purpose,
       namely, to speak and eat with them, and to commit other abominations. Therefore it is necessary
       that he should himself be present, placing himself actually in sight in an assumed body. For, as S.
       Thomas says, Where the Angel's power is, there he operates.
             And it may be asked, if the devil by himself and without any witch takes away anyone's virile
       member, whether there is any difference between one sort of deprivation and the other. In addition
       to what has been said in the First Part of this work on the question, Whether witches can take away
       a member, he does actually take it away, and it is actually restored when it has to be restored.
       Secondly, as it is not taken away without injury, so it is not without pain. Thirdly, that he never
       does this unless compelled by a good Angel, for by so doing he cuts off a great source of profit to
       him; for he knows that he can work more witchcraft on that act than on other human acts. For God
       permits him to do more injury to that than to other human acts, as has been said. But none of the
       above points apply when he works through the agency of a witch, with God's permission.
             And if it is asked whether the devil is more apt to injure men and creatures by himself than
       through a witch, it can be said that there is no comparison between the two cases. For he is
       infinitely more apt to do harm through the agency of witches. First, because he thus gives greater
       offence to God, by usurping to himself a creature dedicated to Him. Secondly, because when God
       is the more offended, He allows him the more power of injuring men. And thirdly, for his own
       gains, which he places in the perdition of souls.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a07a.html (4 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:23 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter VII

                                                  Question I, Chapter VIII

                                                      Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                         HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                 All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a07a.html (5 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:23 PM]
Notes

           “Beothius.” “De Consolatione Philosophiae,” Liner I, Prosa ii. “Atqui talia contuleramus
        arma, quae nisi prius abiecisses, inuicta te firmitate tuerentur.”




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2016.html [2002-01-20 12:03:24 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter VIII


                                  THE
                          MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                       PART II, QUESTION I.
                                                         CHAPTER VIII
                         Of the Manner whereby they Change Men into the Shapes of Beasts.

             But that witches, by the power of devils, change men into the shapes of beasts (for this is their
       chief manner of transmutation), although it has been sufficiently proved in the First Part of the
       work, Question 10, Whether witches can do such things: nevertheless, since that question with its
       arguments and solutions may be rather obscure to some; especially since no actual examples are
       adduced to prove them, and even the method by which they so transform themselves is not
       explained; therefore we add the present exposition by the resolution of several doubts.
             And first, that Canon (26, Q. 5, Episcopi) is not to be understood in this matter in the way in
       which even many learned men (but would that their learning were good!) are deceived; who do not
       fear to affirm publicly in their sermons that such prestidigitatory transmutations are in no way
       possible even by the power of devils. And we have often said that this doctrine is greatly to the
       detriment of the Faith, and strengthens the witches, who rejoice very much in such sermons.
             But such preachers, as has been noted, touch only the outer surface, and fail to reach the inner
       meaning of the words of the Canon. For when it says: Whoever believes that any creature can be
       made, or can be changed for the better or the worse, or be transformed into any other shape or
       likeness except by the Creator Himself Who made all, is without doubt an infidel. . . .
             The reader must here remark two chief things. First, concerning the words “be made”; and
       secondly, concerning the words “be transformed into another likeness.” And as to the first, it is
       answered that “be made” can be understood in two ways: namely, as meaning “be created,” or as
       in the sense of the natural production of anything. Now in the first sense it belongs only to God, as
       is well known, Who in His infinite might can make something out of nothing.
             But in the second sense there is a distinction to be drawn between creatures; for some are
       perfect creatures, like a man, and an ass, etc. And other are imperfect, such as serpents, frogs,
       mice, etc., for they can also be generated from putrefaction. Now the Canon obviously speaks only
       of the former sort, not of the second; for in the case of the second it can be proved from what
       Blessed Albert says in his book On Animals, where he asks: whether devils can make true animals;
       and still with this difference, that they cannot do so in an instant, as God does, but by some
       motion, however sudden, as is shown in the case of the Magicians in Exodus vii. The reader may,
       if he likes, refer to some of the remarks in the question we have quoted in the First Part of the
       work, and in the solution of the first argument.
             Secondly, it is said that they cannot transmute any creature. You may say that transmutation
       is of two sorts, substantial and accidental; and this accidental is again of two kinds, consisting
       either in the natural form belonging to the thing which is seen, or in a form which does not belong
       to the thing which is seen, but exists only in the organs and perceptions of him who sees. The
       Canon speaks of the former, and especially of formal and actual transmutation, in which one
       substance is transmuted into another; and this sort only God can effect, Who is the Creator of such

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a08a.html (1 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:03:24 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter VIII

       actual substances. And it speaks also of the second, although the devil can effect that, in so far as,
       with God's permission, he causes certain diseases and induces some appearance on the accidental
       body. As when a face appears to be leprous, or some such thing.
             But properly speaking it is not such matters that are in question, but apparitions and glamours,
       by which things seem to be transmuted into other likenesses; and we say that the words of the
       Canon cannot exclude such transmutations; for their existence is proved by authority, by reason,
       and by experience; namely, by certain experiences related by S. Augustine in Book XVIII, chapter
       17, of the De Ciuitate Die, and by the arguments in explanation of them. For among other
       prestidigitatory transformations, he mentions that the very famous Sorceress, Circe, changed the
       companions of Ulysses into beasts; and that certain innkeepers' wives had turned their guests into
       beasts of burden. He mentions also that the companions of Diomedes were changed into birds, and
       for a long time flew about the temple of Diomedes; and that Praestantius tells it for a fact that his
       father said that he had been a packhorse, and had carried corn with other animals.
             Now when the companions of Ulysses were changed into beasts, it was only in appearance, or
       deception of the eyes; for the animal shapes were drawn out of the repository or memory of
       images, and impressed on the imaginative faculty. And so imaginary vision was caused, and
       through the strong impression on the other senses and organs, the beholder thought that he saw
       animals, in the manner of which we have already treated. But how these things can be done by the
       devil's power without injury will be shown later.
             But when the guests were changed into beasts of burden by the innkeepers' wives; and when
       the father of Praestantius thought he was a packhorse and carried corn; it is to be noted that in
       these cases there were three deceptions.
             First, that those men were caused by a glamour to seem to be changed into beasts of burden,
       and this change was caused in the way we have said. Second, that devils invisibly bore those
       burdens up when they were too heavy to be carried. Third, that those who seemed to others to be
       changed in shape seemed also to themselves to be changed into beasts; as it happened to
       Nabuchodonosor, who lived for seven years eating straw like an ox.
             And as to the comrades of Diomedes being changed into birds and flying round his temple, it
       is to be said that this Diomedes was one of the Greeks who went to the siege of Troy; and when he
       wished to return home, he was drowned with his comrades in the sea; and then, at the suggestion
       of some idol, a temple was built to him that he might be numbered among the gods; and for a long
       time, to keep that error alive, devils in the shape of birds flew about in place of his companions.
       Therefore that superstition was one of the glamours we have spoken of; for it was not caused by
       the impression of mental images on the imaginative faculty, but by their flying in the sight of men
       in the assumed bodies of birds.
             But if it is asked whether the devils could have deluded the onlookers by the
       above-mentioned method of working upon the mental images, and not by assuming aerial bodies
       like flying birds, the answer is that they could have done so.
             For it was the opinion of some (as S. Thomas tells in the Second Book of Sentences, dist. 8,
       art. 2) that no Angel, good or bad, ever assumed a body; but that all that we read in the Scriptures
       about their appearances was caused by a glamour, or by the imaginary vision.
             And here the learned Saint notes a difference between a glamour and imaginary vision. For in
       a glamour there may be an exterior object which is seen, but it seems other than it is. But
       imaginary vision does not necessarily require an exterior object, but can be caused without that
       and only by those inner mental images impressed on the imagination.


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a08a.html (2 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:03:24 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter VIII

             So, following their opinion, the comrades of Diomedes were not represented by devils in the
       assumed bodies and likeness of birds, but only by a fantastic and imaginary vision caused by
       working upon those mental images, etc.
             But the learned Saint condemns this as an erroneous and not a simple opinion (though, it is
       piously believed, it is not actually heretical), although such appearances of good and bad Angels
       may at times have been imaginary, with no assumed body. But, as he says, the saints are agreed
       that the Angels also appeared to the actual sight, and such appearance was in an assumed body.
       And the scriptural text reads more as if it speaks of bodily appearance than imaginary or
       prestidigitatory ones. Therefore we can say for the present concerning any visions like that of the
       comrades of Diomedes: that although those comrades could by the devil's work have appeared in
       the imaginary vision of the beholders in the manner we have said, yet it is rather presumed that
       they were caused to be seen by devils in assumed aerial bodies like flying birds; or else that other
       natural birds were caused by devils to represent them.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                    Question I, Chapter IX

                                                      Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                         HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                 All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a08a.html (3 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:03:24 PM]
Notes

           “An Ox.” “Daniel” iv, 30: “The same hour the word was fulfilled upon Nabuchodonosor, and
        he was driven away from among men, and did eat grass like an ox, and his body was wet with the
        dew of heaven: till his hairs grew like the feathers of eagles and his nailes like birds' claws.”




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2017.html [2002-01-20 12:03:25 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter IX


                                  THE
                          MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                       PART II, QUESTION I.
                                                          CHAPTER IX
 How Devils may enter the Human Body and the Head without doing any Hurt, when they cause such
                           Metamorphosis by Means of Prestidigitation.

             Concerning the method of causing these illusory transmutations it may further be asked:
       whether the devils are then inside the bodies and heads of those who are deceived, and whether the
       latter are to be considered as possessed by devils; how it can happen without injury to the inner
       perceptions and faculties that a mental image is transferred from one inner faculty to another; and
       whether or not such work ought to be considered miraculous.
             First we must again refer to a distinction between such illusory glamours; for sometimes the
       outer perceptions only are affected, and sometimes the inner perceptions are deluded and so affect
       the outer perceptions.
             In the former case the glamour can be caused without the devils' entering into the outer
       perceptions, and merely by an exterior illusion; as when the interposition of some other body, or in
       some other way; or when he himself assumes a body and imposes himself on the vision.
             But in the latter case it is necessary that he must first occupy the head and the faculties. And
       this is proved by authority and by reason.
             And it is not a valid objection to say that two created spirits cannot be in one and the same
       place, and that the soul pervades the whole of the body. For on this question there is the authority
       of S. John Damascene, when he says: Where the Angel is, there he operates. And S. Thomas, in
       the Second Book of Sentences, dist. 7, art. 5, says: All Angels, good and bad, by their natural
       power, which is superior to all bodily power, are able to transmute our bodies.
             And this is clearly true, not only by reason of the superior nobility of their nature, but because
       the whole mechanism of the world and all corporeal creatures are administered by Angels; as S.
       Gregory says in the 4th Dialogue: In this visible world nothing can be disposed except by an
       invisible creature. Therefore all corporeal matters are governed by the Angels, who are also called,
       not only by the Holy Doctors but also by all the Philosophers, the Powers which move the stars. It
       is clear also from the fact that all human bodies are moved by their souls, just as all other matter is
       moved by the stars and the Powers which move them. Any who wish may refer to S. Thomas in
       the First Part, Quest. 90, art. 1.
             From this it is concluded that, since devils operates there where they are, therefore when they
       confuse the fancy and the inner perceptions they are existing in them.
             Again, although to enter the soul is possible only to God Who created it, yet devils can, with
       God's permission, enter our bodies; and they an then make impressions on the inner faculties
       corresponding to the bodily organs. And by those impressions the organs are affected in proportion
       as the inner perceptions are affected in the way which has been shown: that the devil can draw out
       some image retained in a faculty corresponding to one of the senses; as he draws from the
       memory, which is in the back part of the head, an image of a horse, and locally moves that

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a09a.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:25 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter IX

       phantasm to the middle part of the head, where are the cells of imaginative power; and finally to
       the sense of reason, which is in the front of the head. And he causes such a sudden change and
       confusion, that such objects are necessarily thought to be actual things seen with the eyes. This can
       be clearly exemplified by the natural defect in frantic men and other maniacs.
              But if it is asked how he can do this without causing pain in the head, the answer is easy. For
       in the first place he does not cause any actual physical change in the organs, but only moves the
       mental images. And secondly, he does not effect these changes by injecting any active quality
       which would necessarily cause pain, since the devil is himself without any corporeal quality, and
       can therefore operate without the use of any such quality. Thirdly, as has been said, he effects
       these transmutations only by a local movement from one organ to another, and not by other
       movements through which painful transformations are sometimes caused.
              And as for the objection that two spirits cannot separately exist in the same place, and that,
       since the soul exists in the head, how can a devil be there also? It is to be said that the soul is
       thought to reside in the centre of the heart, in which it communicates with all the members by an
       outpouring of life. An example can be taken from a spider, which feels in the middle of its web
       when any part of the web is touched.
              However, S. Augustine says in his book On the Spirit and Soul, that it is all in all, and all in
       every part of the body. Granting that the soul is in the head, still the devil can work there; for his
       work is different from the work of the soul. The work of the soul is in the body, to inform it and
       fill it with life; so that it exists not merely locally, but in the whole matter. But the devil works in
       such a part and such a place of the body, effecting his changes in respect of the mental images.
       Therefore, since there is no confusion between their respective operations, they can both exist
       together in the same part of the body.
              There is also the question whether such men are to be considered obsessed or frenzied, that is,
       possessed of devils. But this is considered separately; namely, whether it is possible through the
       work of witches for a man to be obsessed with a devil, that is, that the devil should actually and
       bodily possess him. And this question is specially discussed in the following chapter, since it has
       this special difficulty, namely, whether this can be caused through the operations of witches.
              But as to the question whether the temporal works of witches and devils are to be considered
       as miracles or of a miraculous nature; it is to be said that they are so, in so far as they are beyond
       the order of created nature as known to us, and are done by creatures unknown to us. But they are
       not properly speaking miracles as are those which are outside the whole of created nature; as are
       the miracles of God and the Saints. (See what was written in the First Part of this work, in the Fifth
       Question, in the refutation of the third error.)
              But there are those who object that this sort of work must not be considered miracles, but
       simply works of the devil; since the purpose of miracles is the strengthening of the Faith, and they
       must not be conceded to the adversary of the Faith. And also because the signs of Antichrist are
       called lying signs by the Apostle.
              First it is to be said that to work miracles is the gift of freely given grace. And they can be
       done by bad men and bad spirits, up to the limits of the power which is in them.
              Wherefore the miracles wrought by the good can be distinguished from those wrought by the
       wicked in at least three ways. First, the signs which are given by the good are done by Divine
       power in such matters as are beyond the capacity of their own natural power, such as raising the
       dead, and things of that sort, which the devils are not able to accomplish in truth, but only by an
       illusion: so Simon Magus moved the head of a dead man; but such manifestations cannot last long.


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a09a.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:25 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter IX

       Secondly, they can be distinguished by their utility; for the miracles of the good are of a useful
       nature, as the healing of sickness, and such things. But the miracles done by witches are concerned
       with harmful and idle things; as when they fly in the air, or benumb the limbs of men, or such
       things. And S. Peter assigns this difference in the Itinerarium of Clement.
             The third difference relates to the Faith. For the miracles of the good are ordained for the
       edification of the Faith and of good living; whereas the miracles of the wicked are manifestly
       detrimental to the Faith and to righteousness.
             They are distinguished also by the way in which they are done. For the good do miracles in a
       pious and reverent invocation of the Divine Name. But witches and wicked men work them by
       certain ravings and invocations of devils.
             And there is no difficulty in the fact that the Apostle called the works of the devil and
       Antichrist lying wonders; for the marvels so done by Divine permission are true in some respects
       and false in others. They are true in so far as they are within the limits of the devil's power. But
       they are false when he appears to do things which are beyond his power, such as raising the dead,
       or making the blind to see. For when he appears to do the former, he either enters into the dead
       body or else removes it, and himself takes its place in an assumed aerial body; and in the latter
       case he takes away the sight by a glamour, and then suddenly restores it by taking away the
       disability he has caused, not by bringing light to the inner perceptions, as is told in the legend of
       Bartholomew. Indeed all the marvellous works of Antichrist and of witches can be said to be lying
       signs, insasmuch as their only purpose is to deceive. See S. Thomas, dist. 8, de Uirtute
       Daemonum.
             We may also quote here the distinction which is drawn in the Compendium of Theological
       Truth between a wonder and a miracle. For in a miracle four conditions are required: that it should
       be done by God; that it should be beyond the existing order of nature; thirdly, that it should be
       manifest; and fourthly, that it should be for the corroboration of the Faith. But since the works of
       witches fail to fulfil at least the first and last conditions, therefore they may be called wonderful
       works, but nor miracles.
             It can also be argued in this way. Although witches' works can in a sense be said to be
       miraculous, yet some miracles are supernatural, some unnatural, and some preternatural. And they
       are supernatural when they can be compared with nothing in nature, or in natural power, as when a
       virgin gives birth. They are unnatural when they are against the normal course of nature but do not
       overstep the limits of nature, such as causing the blind to see. And they are preternatural when they
       are done in a manner parallel to that of nature, as when rods are changed into serpents; for this can
       be done naturally also, through long putrefaction on account of seminal reasons; and thus the
       works of magicians may be said to be marvellous.
             It is expedient to recount an actual example, and then to explain it step by step. There is a
       town in the diocese of Strasburg, the name of which it is charitable and honourable to withhold, in
       which a workman was one day chopping some wood to burn in his house. A large cat suddenly
       appeared and began to attack him, and when he was driving it off, another even larger one came
       and attacked him with the first more fiercely. And when he again tried to drive them away, behold,
       three of them together attacked him, jumping up at his face, and biting and scratching his legs. In
       great fright and, as he said, more panic-stricken than he had ever been, he crossed himself and,
       leaving his work, fell upon the cats, which were swarming over the wood and again leaping at his
       face and throat, and with difficulty drove them away by beating one on the head, another on the
       legs, and another on the back. After the space of an hour, while he was again engaged upon his


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a09a.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:25 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter IX

       task, two servants of the town magistrates came and took him as a malefactor and led him into the
       presence of the bailiff or judge. And the judge, looking at him from a distance, and refusing to hear
       him, ordered him to be thrown into the deepest dungeon of a certain tower or prison, where those
       who were under sentence of death were placed. The man cried out, and for three days bitterly
       complained to the prison guards that he should suffer in that way, when he was conscious of no
       crime; but the more the guards tried to procure him a hearing, the more furious the judge became,
       expressing in the strongest terms his indignation that so great a malefactor had not yet
       acknowledged his crime, but dared to proclaim his innocence when the evidence of the facts
       proved his horrible crime. But although these could not prevail upon him, yet the judge was
       induced by the advice of the other magistrates to grant the man a hearing. So when he was brought
       out of prison into the presence of the judge, and the judge refused to look at him, the poor man
       threw himself before the knees of the other magistrates, pleading that he might know the reason for
       his misfortune; and the judge broke into these words: You most wicked of men, how can you not
       acknowledge your crime? At such a time on such a day you beat three respected matrons of this
       town, so that they lie in their beds unable to rise or to move. The poor man cast his mind back to
       the events of that day and that hour, and said: Never in all my life have I struck or beaten a
       woman, and I can prove by credible witnesses that at that time on that day I was busy chopping
       wood; and an hour afterwards your servants found me still engaged on that task. Then the judge
       again exclaimed in a fury: See how he tries to conceal his crime! The women are bewailing their
       blows, they exhibit the marks, and publicly testify that he struck them. Then the poor man
       considered more closely on that even, and said: I remember that I struck some creatures at that
       time, but they were not women. The magistrates in astonishment asked him to relate what sort of
       creatures he had struck; and he told, to their great amazement, all that had happened, as we have
       related it. So, understanding that it was the work of the devil, they released the poor man and let
       him go away unharmed, telling him not to speak of this matter to anyone. But it could not be
       hidden from those devout persons present who were zealous for the Faith.
                                                                 Page 1 of 2


                                     Question I, Chapter IX Continued . . . .

                                                      Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a09a.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:25 PM]
Notes

           “On the Spirit.” The treatise “De Natura et Origine Animae” was written towards the end of
        the year 419.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2018.html [2002-01-20 12:03:25 PM]
Notes

           “Apostle.” S. Paul, “II. Thessalonians” ii, 8, 9.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2019.html [2002-01-20 12:03:26 PM]
Notes

           “Itinerarium.” Pseudo-Clementines.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2020.html [2002-01-20 12:03:26 PM]
Notes

            “Lying Wonders.” “II Thessalonians” ii, 8-9: “That wicked one . . . whose coming is according
        to the working of Satan, in all power, and signs, and lying wonders.”




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2021.html [2002-01-20 12:03:26 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter IX


                                  THE
                          MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                    PART II, QUESTION I.
                                                   CHAPTER IX CONTINUED

            Now concerning this it may be asked, whether the devils appeared thus in assumed shapes
       without the presence of the witches, or whether the witches were actually present, converted by
       some glamour into the shapes of those beasts. And in answering this it should be said that,
       although it was equally possible for the devils to act in either way, it is rather presumed that it was
       done in the second manner. For when the devils attacked the workman in the shapes of cats, they
       could suddenly, by local motion through the air, transfer the women to their houses with the blows
       which they received as cats from the workman; and no on doubts that this was because of a mutual
       pact formerly made between them. For in the same way they can cause injury or wound in a person
       whom they wish to bewitch, by means of puncturing a painted or molten image which represents
       the person whom they wish to injure. Many examples of this could be adduced.
            And it cannot be validly objected that perhaps those women who were so injured were
       innocent, because according to previously quoted examples it is shown that injuries may happen
       even to the innocent, when someone is unknowingly hurt by a witch by means of an artificial
       image. The example is not apposite; for it is one thing to be hurt by a devil through a witch, and
       another thing to be hurt by the devil himself without any witch. For the devil receives blows in the
       form of an animal, and transfers them to one who is bound to him by a pact, when it is with such
       an one's consent that he acts in this manner in such a shape. Therefore he can in this way hurt only
       the guilty who are bound to him by a pact, and never the innocent. But when devils seek to do
       injury by means of witches, then, with the permission of God for the avenging of so great a crime,
       they often afflict even the innocent.
            Nevertheless, devils at times, with God's permission, in their own persons hurt even the
       innocent; and formerly they injured the Blessed Job, although they were not personally present,
       nor did the devils make use of any such illusory apparition as in the example we have quoted,
       when they used the phantasm of a cat, an animal which is, in the Scriptures, an appropriate symbol
       of the perfidious, just as a dog is the symbol of preachers; for cats are always setting snares for
       each other. And the Order of Preaching Friars was represented in its first Founder by a dog barking
       against heresy.
            Therefore it is presumed that those three witches attacked the workman in the second manner,
       either because the first manner did not please them so much, or because the second suited more
       with their curiosity.
            And this was the order which they observed. First, they were urged to do this at the instance
       of the devils, and not the devils at the instance of the witches. For so we have often found in their
       confessions, that at the instance of devils who constantly spur them on to commit evil, they have to
       do more than they would. And it is likely that the witches would not, on their own account, have
       thought of attacking the poor man.
            And there is no doubt that the reason why the devils urged them to do this is that they knew


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a09b.html (1 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:03:26 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter IX

       well that, when a manifest crime remains unpunished, God is the more offended, the Catholic
       Faith is brought into disrepute, and the number of witches is the more increased. Secondly, having
       gained their consent, the devils transported their bodies with that ease which belongs to a spiritual
       power over a bodily power. Thirdly, having in the way which has been told been turned into the
       forms of beasts by some glamour, they had to attack the workman; and the devils did not defend
       them from the blows, although they could have done so just as easily as they had transported them;
       but they permitted them to be beaten, and the one who beat them to be known, in the knowledge
       that those crimes would, for the reasons we have mentioned, remain unpunished by faint-hearted
       men who had no zeal for the Faith.
             We read also of a certain holy man, who once found the devil preaching in the form of a
       devout priest preaching in a church, and knowing in his spirit that is was the devil, observed his
       words, whether he was teaching the people well or ill. And finding him irreproachable and
       inveighing against sin, he went up to him at the end of the sermon and asked him the reason for
       this. And the devil answered: I preach the truth, knowing that, because they are hearers of the word
       only, and not doers, God is the more offended and my gain is increased.
                                                                 Page 2 of 2


                                                    Question I, Chapter X

                                                      Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a09b.html (2 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:03:26 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter X


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                       PART II, QUESTION I.
                                                          CHAPTER X
  Of the Method by which Devils through the Operations of Witches sometimes actually possess men.

             It has been shown in the previous chapter how devils can enter the heads and other parts of
       the body of men, and can move the inner mental images from place to place. But someone may
       doubt whether they are able at the instance of witches to obsess men entirely; or fell some
       uncertainty about their various methods of causing such obsession without the instance of witches.
       And to clear up these doubts we must undertake three explanations. First, as to the various
       methods of possession. Secondly, how at the instance of witches and with God's permission devils
       at time possess men in all those ways. Thirdly, we must substantiate our arguments with facts and
       examples.
             With references to the first, we must make an exception of that general method by which the
       devil inhabits a man in any mortal sin. S. Thomas, in Book 3, quest. 3, speaks of this method
       where he considers the doubt whether the devil always substantially possesses a man when he
       commits mortal sin; and the reason for the doubt is that the indwelling Holy Ghost always forms a
       man with grace, according to I. Corinthians, iii: Ye are the temple of God, and the spirit of God
       dwelleth in you. And, since guilt is opposed to grace, it would seem that there were opposing
       forces in the same place.
             And there he proves that to possess a man can be understood in two ways: either with regard
       to the soul, or with regard to the body. And in the first way it is not possible for the devil to
       possess the soul, since God alone can enter that; therefore the devil is not in this way the cause of
       sin, which the Holy Spirit permits the soul itself to commit; so there is no similitude between the
       two.
             But as to the body, we may say that the devil can possess a man in two ways, just as there are
       two classes of men: those who are in sin, and those who are in grace. In the first way, we may say
       that, since a man is by any mortal sin brought into the devil's service, in so far as the devil provides
       the outer suggestion of sin either to the senses or to the imagination, to that extent he is said to
       inhabit the character of a man when he is moved by every stirring temptation, like a ship in the sea
       without a rudder.
             The devil can also essentially possess a man as is clear in the case of frantic men. But this
       rather belongs to the question of punishment than that of sin, as will be shown; and bodily
       punishments are not always the consequence of sin, but are inflicted now upon sinners and now
       upon the innocent. Therefore both those who are and those who are not in a state of grace can, in
       the depth of the incomprehensible judgement of God, be essentially possessed by devils. And
       though this method of possession is not quite pertinent to our inquire, we have set it down lest it
       should seem impossible to anyone that, with God's permission, men should at times be
       substantially inhabited by devils at the instance of witches.
             We may say, therefore, that just as there are five ways in which devils by themselves, without

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a10a.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:27 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter X

       witches, can injure and possess men, so they can also do so in those ways at the instance of
       witches; since then God is the more offended, and greater power of molesting men is allowed to
       the devil through witches. And the methods are briefly the following, excepting the fact that they
       sometimes plague a man through his external possessions: sometimes they injure men only in their
       own bodies; sometimes in their and in their faculties; sometimes they only tempt them inwardly
       and outwardly; others they at times deprive of the use of their reason; others they change into the
       appearance of irrational beasts. We shall speak of these methods singly.
             But first we shall rehearse five reasons why God allows men to be possessed, for the sake of
       preserving a due order in our matter. For sometimes a man is possessed for his own advantage;
       sometimes for a slight sin of another; and sometimes for his own venial sin; sometimes for
       another's heavy sin. For all these reasons let no one doubt that God allows such things to be done
       by devils at the instance of witches; and it is better to prove each of them by the Scriptures, rather
       than by recent examples, since new things are always strengthened by old examples.
             For an example of the first is clearly shown in the Dialogue of Severus, a very dear disciple
       of S. Martin, where he tells that a certain Father of very holy life was so gifted by grace with the
       power of expelling devils, that they were put to flight not only by his words, but even by his letters
       or his hair-shirt. And since the Father became very famous in the world, and felt himself tempted
       with vainglory, although he manfully resisted that vice, yet, that he might be the more humiliated,
       he prayed with his whole heart to God that he might be for five months possessed by a devil; and
       this was done. For he was at once possessed and had to be put in chains, and everything had to
       applied to him which is customary in the case of demoniacs. But at the end of the fifth month he
       was immediately delivered both from all vainglory and from the devil. But we do not read, nor is it
       for the present maintained, that for this reason a man can be possessed by a devil through the
       witchcraft of another man; although, as we have said, the judgements of God are
       incomprehensible.
             For the second reason, when someone is possessed because of the light sin of another, S.
       Gregory gives an example. The Blessed Abbot Eleutherius, a most devout man, was spending the
       night near a convent of virgins, who unknown to him ordered to be put by his cell a young boy
       who used to be tormented all night by the devil. But on that same night the boy was delivered from
       the devil by the presence of the Father. When the Abbot learned of this, and the boy now being
       placed in the holy man's monastery, after many days he began to exult rather immoderately over
       the boy's liberation, and said to his brother monks: The devil was playing his pranks with those
       Sisters, but he had not presumed to approach this boy since he came to the servants of God. And
       behold! the devil at once began to torment the boy. And by the tears and fasting of the holy man
       and his brethren he was with difficulty delivered, but on the same day. And indeed that an innocent
       person should be possessed for the slight fault of another is not surprising when men are possessed
       by devils for their own light fault, or for another's heavy sin, or for their own heavy sin, and some
       also at the instance of witches.
             Cassia, in his First Collation of the Abbot Serenus, gives an example of how one Moses was
       possessed for his own venial sin. This Moses, he says, was a hermit of upright and pious life; but
       because on one occasion he engaged in a dispute with the Abbot Macharius, and went a little too
       far in the expression of a certain opinion, he was immediately delivered up to a terrible devil, who
       caused him to void his natural excrements through his mouth. And that this scourge was inflicted
       by God for the sake of purgation, lest any stain of his momentary fault should remain in him, is
       clear from his miraculous cure. For by continual prayers and submission to the Abbot Macharius,


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a10a.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:27 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter X

       the vile spirit was quickly driven away and departed from him.
             A similar case is that related by S. Gregory in his First Dialogue of the nun who ate a lettuce
       without having first made the sign of the Cross, and was set free by the Blessed Father Equitius.
             In the same Dialogue St. Gregory tells an example of the fourth case, where someone in
       possessed because of the heavy sin of another. The Blessed Bishop Fortunatus had driven the devil
       from a possessed man, and the devil began to walk about the streets of the city in the guise of a
       pilgrim, crying out: Oh, the holy man Bishop Fortunatus! See, he has cast me, a pilgrim, out of my
       lodging, and I can find no rest anywhere. Then a certain man sitting with his wife and son invited
       the pilgrim to lodge with him, and asking why he had been turned out, was delighted with the
       derogatory story of the holy man which the pilgrim had invented. And thereupon the devil entered
       his son, and cast him upon the fire, and killed him. And then for the first time did the unhappy
       father understand whom he had received as a guest.
             And fifthly, we read many examples of men being possessed for their own heavy sin, both in
       the Holy Scripture and in the passions of the Saints. For in I. Kings xv, Saul was possessed for
       disobedience to God. And, as we have said, we have mentioned all these so that it need not seem
       to anyone impossible that men should also be possessed because of the crimes of, and at the
       instance of, witches. And we shall be able to understand the various methods of such possession
       by quoting actual examples.
             In the time of Pope Pius II the following was the experience of one of us two Inquisitors
       before he entered upon his office in the Inquisition. A certain Bohemian from the town of Dachov
       brought his only son, a secular priest, to Rome to be delivered, because he was possessed. It
       happened that I, one of us Inquisitors, went into a refectory, and that priest and his father came and
       sat down at the same table with me. We saluted each other, and talked together, as is customary;
       and the father kept sighing and praying Almighty God that his journey might prove to have been
       successful. I felt great pity for him, and began to ask what was the reason of his journey and of his
       sorrow. Then he, in the hearing of his son who was sitting next to me at the table, answered:
       “Alas! I have a son possessed by a devil, and with great trouble and expense I have brought him
       here to be delivered.” And when I asked where the son was, he showed me him sitting by my side.
       I was a little frightened, and looked at him closely; and because he took his food with such
       modesty, and answered piously to all questions, I began to doubt that he was not possessed, but
       that some infirmity had happened to him. Then the son himself told what had happened, showing
       how and for how long he had been possessed, and saying: “A certain witch brought this evil upon
       me. For I was rebuking her on some matter concerned with the discipline of the Church,
       upbraiding her rather strongly since she was of an obstinate disposition, when she said that after a
       few days that would happen to me which has happened. And the devil which possesses me has told
       me that a charm was placed by the witch under a certain tree, and that until it was removed I could
       not be delivered; but he would not tell me which was the tree.” But I would not in the least have
       believed his words if he had not at once informed me of the facts of the case. For when I asked him
       about the length of the intervals during which he had the use of his reason more than is usual in the
       case of persons possessed, he answered: “I am only deprived of the use of my reason when I wish
       to contemplate holy things or to visit sacred places. For the devil specifically told me in his own
       words uttered through my mouth that, because he had up to that time been much offended by my
       sermons to the people, we would in no way allow me to preach.” For according to his father, he
       was a preacher full of grace, and loved by all. But I, the Inquisitor, wishing for proofs, had him
       taken for a fortnight and more to various holy places, and especially to the Church of S. Praxedes


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a10a.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:27 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter X

       the Virgin, where there is part of the marble pillar to which Our Saviour was bound when He was
       scourged, and to the place where S. Peter the Apostle was crucified; and in all these places he
       uttered horrible cries while he was being exorcised, now saying that he wished to come forth, and
       after a little maintaining the contrary. And as we have said before, in all his behaviour he remained
       a sober priest without any eccentricity, except during the process of any exorcisms; and when these
       were finished, and the stole was taken from his neck, he showed no sign of madness or any
       immoderate action. But when he passed any church, and genuflected in honour of the Glorious
       Virgin, the devil made him thrust his tongue far out of his mouth; and when he was asked whether
       he could not restrain himself from doing this, he answered: “I cannot help myself at all, for so he
       uses all my limbs and organs, my neck, my tongue, and my lungs, whenever he pleases, causing
       me to speak or to cry out; and I hear the words as if they were spoken by myself, but I am
       altogether unable to restrain them; and when I try to engage in prayer he attacks me more
       violently, thrusting out my tongue.” And there was in the Church of S. Peter a column brought
       from Solomon's Temple, by virtue of which many who are obsessed with devils are liberated,
       because Christ had stood near it when He preached in the Temple; but even here he could not be
       delivered, owing to the hidden purpose of God which reserved another method for his liberation.
       For though he remained shut in by the column for a whole day and night, yet on the following day,
       after various exorcisms had been performed upon him, with a great concourse of people standing
       round, he was asked by which part of the column Christ had stood; and he bit the column with his
       teeth, and, crying out, showed the place, saying: “Here He stood! Here He stood!” And at last he
       said, “I will not go forth.” And when he was asked why, he answered in the Italian tongue
       (although the poor priest did not understand that language), They all practise such and such things,
       naming the worst vice of lustfulness. And afterwards the priest asked me, saying, “Father, what did
       those Italian words mean which came from my mouth?” And when I told him, he answered, “I
       heard the words, but I could not understand them.” Eventually it proved that this demoniac was of
       that sort of which the Saviour spoke in the Gospel, saying: This sort goeth not out save by prayer
       and fasting. For a venerable Bishop, who had been driven from his see by the Turks, piously took
       compassion on him, and by fasting on bread and water for forty days, and by prayers and
       exorcisms, at last through the grace of God delivered him and sent him back to his home rejoicing.
                                                                 Page 1 of 2


                                      Question I, Chapter X Continued . . . .

                                                      Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a10a.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:27 PM]
Notes

           “Severus.” Sulpicius Severus, who has been styled the Christian Sallust, was born in Aquitaine
        about 360; and died circa 420-25. He became a personal friend and enthusiastic disciple of S.
        Martin, and lived near Eauze, at Toulouse and Luz in Southern France. His “Life of S. Martin”
        was very popular during the Middle Ages, as also were his “Two Dialogues,” formerly divided
        into three. His works are to be found in Migne, “Patres Latini,” XX, 95-248.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2022.html [2002-01-20 12:03:27 PM]
Notes

           “Equitius.” In 487 Equitius was Bishop of Matelica, a diocese now joined to Fabriano. Only
        one other Bishop (Florentius) of the ancient see is known.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2023.html [2002-01-20 12:03:28 PM]
Notes

           “Pius II.” Enea Silvio de’ Piccolomini was born at Corsignano, near Siena, 18 October, 1405;
        and elected to the Chair of S. Peter, 19 August, 1459. He died at Ancona, 14 August, 1464.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2024.html [2002-01-20 12:03:28 PM]
Notes

            “S. Praxedes.” Praxedes and Pudentiana were the daughters of the Senator Pudens, a pupil of
        S. Peter. There was an old title-church of Rome, “titulus Pudentis,” called also the “ecclesia
        Pudentiana.” The two female figures in the mosaic of the apse of S. Pudenziana, via Urbana, are
        Pudentiana and Praxedes. In the fourth century a new church, “titulus Praxedis,” was built near
        Santa Maria Maggiore, and when Paschal I in 822 rebuilt the church in its present form (the
        basilica and title-church S. Prassede all’ Esquilino) he translated to it the bodies of S. Praxedes,
        S. Prudentiana, and of many other martyrs. Under the High Altar are the chief Relics of the Saints.
        In the Chapel of S. Zeno, which dates from the ninth century, is the Holy Pillar of the Scourging
        brought in 1223 from Jerusalem by Cardinal Giovanni Colonna. Another portion of the Holy
        Pillar is preserved in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre at Jerusalem, where it is publically
        venerated each year on Easter Eve. S. Prassede is one of the richest churches in Rome in Relics. It
        contains the Bodies of S. Zoe, S. Feldian, S. Candid, S. Basil, S. Celestine I, S. Nicomedius;
        important Relics of S. Matthew, S. Luke, S. Bartholomew, S. Philip, S. Andrew, S. Peter, S. Paul,
        and S. John Baptist; some of the garments of Our Lady; a piece of the seamless robe of Our Lord;
        thee Thorns from the Crown of Thorns; and four fragments of wood from the True Cross.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2025.html [2002-01-20 12:03:28 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter X


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                     PART II, QUESTION I.
                                                    CHAPTER X CONTINUED

             Now it would be a miracle if anyone in this life could thoroughly explain in what and in how
       many ways the devil possesses or injures men: yet we can say that, leaving out of account his
       method of injuring men in their temporal fortunes, there are five ways. For some are affected only
       in their own bodies; some both in their bodies and in their inner perceptions; some only in their
       inner perceptions; some are so punished at to be at times only deprived of their reason; and others
       are turned into the semblance of irrational beasts. Now the priest we have just mentioned was
       possessed in the fourth manner. For he was not touched in his worldly fortunes or in his own body,
       as it happened to the Blessed Job, over whom the Scripture clearly tells us that God gave the devil
       power, saying to Satan: Behold, all that he hath is in thy power; only upon himself put not forth
       thine hand. And this refers to exterior things. But afterwards He gave him power over his body,
       saying: Behold, he is in thine hand; but save his life.
             And it can also be said that Job was tormented in the third manner, that is, in the inner
       perceptions of his soul as well as his body; for it is said in Job xii: If it is said to the Lord, My bed
       will console me, and I will take comfort to myself on my couch, then Thou wilt terrify me with
       dreams, and shake me with the horror of visions: though these dreams were caused by the devil,
       according to Nicolas of Lyra and S. Thomas: Thou wilt terrify me with dreams, which appear to
       me in sleep, and with visions which come to me waking by a distortion of my inner perceptions.
       For the phantasms which occur to the thoughts in the day-time can become the terror of sleepers,
       and such were visited upon Job through the infirmity of his body. Therefore he was so shut off
       from all comfort that he saw no remedy or way of escaping from his misery except in death, and
       said that he was shaken with horror. And no one doubts that witches can injure men in these ways
       through devils, as will be shown in what follows, how they bring injuries upon the fortunes of men
       and upon the bodies of men and animals by means of hailstorms.
             And there is a third way of injuring the body and the inner perceptions, without taking away
       the reason, which is shown when witches, as has been said, so inflame the minds of men with
       unlawful lust that they are compelled to travel long distances in the night to go to their mistresses,
       being too fast bound in the net of carnal desire.
             We may mention an example which is said to have happened in Hesse, in the diocese of
       Marburg. A certain priest was possessed, and during an exorcism the devil was asked for how long
       he had inhabited that priest. He answered, For seven years. And when the exorcist objected, But
       you have tormented him for hardly three years; where were you for the rest of the time? He
       answered, I was hiding in his body. And when he asked in what part of the body, he answered,
       Generally in his head. And when he was again asked where he was when the priest was celebrating
       the Sacrament, he said, I hid myself under his tongue. And the other said: Wretch! How were you
       so bold as not to flee from the presence of your Creator? Then the devil said: Anyone may hide
       under a bridge while a holy man is crossing, as long as he does not pause in his walk. But with the


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a10b.html (1 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:03:28 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter X

       help of Divine grace the priest was delivered, whether he told the truth or not; for both he and his
       father are liars.
             The fourth method applies to the case of the priest who was liberated in Rome, under the
       proposition that the devil can enter the body, but not the soul, which only God can enter. But when
       I say that the devil can enter the body, I do not mean that he can occupy the essential limits of the
       body.
             I will explain this further; and in doing so it will be shown how devils sometimes
       substantially occupy a man, and at times deprive him of his reason. For we may say that the limits
       of the body can be considered in two ways: they may be physical or essential limits. Whenever any
       Angel, good or bad, works within the physical limits of the body, he enters the body in such a way
       as to influence its physical capacities. And in this way the good Angels cause imaginary visions in
       the good. But they are never said to enter into the essence of the body, since they cannot do so,
       either as part of it or as a quality of it. Not as a part, for the angelic and the human essence are
       entirely different from each other; and not as a quality, as if giving it its character, for it has its
       character by creation from God. Wherefore He alone is able to influence its inner essence, and to
       preserve it when He is pleased in His mercy to preserve it.
             So we conclude that, speaking of all other perfections in the good or defects in the wicked,
       when these are caused by a spirit operating in the head and its attributes, such a spirit enters into
       the head within the physical limits of the physical capacities of the body.
             But if the spirit is working upon the soul, then again it works from the outside, but in various
       ways. And they are said to work on the soul when they represent phantasms or shapes to the
       intellect, and not only to the common understanding and the outer perceptions. And when bad
       Angels so operate, there follow temptations and evil thoughts and affections, caused by an indirect
       influence upon the intellect. But good Angels cause phantasms of revelation which enlighten the
       understanding. And there is this difference between them; that good Angels can even directly
       impress enlightening fancies upon the intellect; but bad Angels are said not to enlighten but rather
       to darken by means of their phantasms, and they cannot influence the intellect directly, but only
       indirectly, in so far as the intellect is bound to take such phantasms into consideration.
             But even a good Angel is not said to enter into the soul, although he enlightens it: similarly a
       superior Angel is not said to enter into an inferior, although he enlightens it; but he works only
       from the outside, and co-operates in the way we have said. Therefore far less can a bad Angel enter
       the soul.
             And so the devil occupied the body of the priest in three ways. First, as he could enter his
       body within its physical limits, so he occupied his head by substantially inhabiting it. Secondly, he
       could extrinsically work upon his reason. And he could have so tormented him without any
       intermission or respite; but we may say that the priest had this gift from God, that he should not be
       tormented by the devil without intermission. Thirdly, that although he was deprived of the power
       of the sane use of words, yet he was always conscious of his words, though not of their meaning.
       And this differs from the other methods of obsession, for we generally read that those who are
       possessed are afflicted by devils without intermission; as is clear in the case of the lunatic in the
       Gospel, whose father said to Jesus: Lord, have mercy on my son, for he is lunatic, and sore vexed
       (S. Matthew xvii); and of the woman whom Satan had crippled for eighteen years, who was bowed
       together and could in no wise lift herself up (S. Luke xiii). And in these ways devils can without
       doubt at the instance of witches and with God's permission inflict torments.
                                                                 Page 2 of 2

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a10b.html (2 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:03:28 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter X




                                                    Question I, Chapter XI

                                                      Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a10b.html (3 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:03:28 PM]
Notes

           “Nicolas of Lyra.” “Doctor planus et utilis,” the famous exegete, was born at Lyra in
        Normandy, 1270; and died at Paris, 1340. He is the author of numerous theological works, by far
        the most famous of which is his monumental “Postillae perpetuae in uniuersam S. Scripturam,”
        which was so popular that it gained the distinction of being the first biblical commentary to be
        printed.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2026.html [2002-01-20 12:03:29 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter XI


                                  THE
                          MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                       PART II, QUESTION I.
                                                          CHAPTER XI
                            Of the Method by which they can Inflict Every Sort of Infirmity,
                                          generally Ills of the Graver Kind.

             But there is no bodily infirmity, not even leprosy or epilepsy, which cannot be caused by
       witches, with God's permission. And this is proved by the fact that no sort of infirmity is excepted
       by the Doctors. For a careful consideration of what has already been written concerning the power
       of devils and the wickedness of witches will show that this statement offers no difficulty. Nider
       also deals with this subject both in his Book of Precepts and in his Formicarius, where he asks:
       Whether witches can actually injure men by their witchcraft. And the question makes no exception
       of any infirmity, however incurable. And he there answers that they can do so, and proceeds to ask
       in what way and by what means.
             And as to the first, he answers, as has been shown in the First Question of the First Part of
       this treatise. And it is proved also by S. Isidore where he describes the operations of witches
       (Etym. 8, cap. 9), and says that they are called witches on account of the magnitude of their crimes;
       for they disturb the elements by raising up storms with the help of devils, they confuse the minds
       of men in the ways already mentioned, by either entirely obstructing or gravely impeding the use
       of their reason. He adds also that without the use of any poison, but by the mere virulence of their
       incantations, they can deprive men of their lives.
             It is proved also by S. Thomas in the Second Book of Sentences, dist. 7 and 8, and in Book IV,
       dist. 34, and in general all the Theologians write that witches can with the help of the devil bring
       harm upon men and their affairs in all the ways in which the devil alone can injure or deceive,
       namely, in their affairs, their reputation, their body, their reason, and their life; which means that
       those injuries which are caused by the devil without any witch, can also be caused by a witch; and
       even more readily so, on account of the greater offence which is given to the Divine Majesty, as
       has been shown above.
             In Job i and ii is found a clear case of the injury in temporal affairs. The injury to reputation is
       shown in the history of the Blessed Jerome, that the devil transformed himself into the appearance
       of S. Silvanus, Bishop of Nazareth, a friend of S. Jerome. And this devil approached a noble
       woman by night in her bed and began first to provoke and entice her with lewd words, and then
       invited her to perform the sinful act. And when she called out, the devil in the form of the saintly
       Bishop hid under the woman's bed, and being sought for and found there, he in lickerish language
       declared lyingly that he was the Bishop Silvanus. On the morrow therefore, when the devil had
       disappeared, the holy man was scandalously defamed; but his good name was cleared when the
       devil confessed at the tomb of S. Jerome that he had done this in an assumed body.
             The injury to the body is shown in the case of the Blessed Job, who was stricken by the devil
       with terrible sores, which are explained as a form of leprosy. And Sigisbert and Vincent of


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a11a.html (1 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:29 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter XI

       Beauvais (Spec. Hist. XXV, 37) both tell that in the time of the Emperor Louis II, in the diocese of
       Mainz, a certain devil began to thrown stones and to beat at the houses as if with a hammer. And
       then by public statements, and secret insinuations, he spread discord ad troubled the minds of
       many. Then he excited the anger of all against one man, whose lodging, where he was resting, he
       set on fire, and said that they were all suffering for his sins. So at last that man had to find his
       lodging in the fields. And when the priests were saying a litany on this account, the devil stoned
       many of the people with stones till he hurt them to bleeding; and sometimes he would desist, and
       sometimes rage; and this continued for three years, until all the houses there were burned down.
             Exampled of the injury to the use of the reason, and of the tormenting of the inner
       perceptions, are seen in those possessed and frenzied men of whom the Gospels tell. And as for
       death, and that they deprive some of their lives, it is proved in Tobias vi, in the case of the seven
       husbands of the virgin Sara, who were killed because of their lecherous lust and unbridled desired
       for the virgin Sara, of whom they were not worthy to be the husbands. Therefore it is concluded
       that both by themselves, and all the more with the help of witches, devils can injure men in every
       way without exception.
             But if it is asked whether injuries of this sort are to be ascribed rather to devils than to
       witches, it is answered that, when the devils cause injuries by their own direct action, then they are
       principally to be ascribed to them. But when they work through the agency of witches for the
       disparagement and offending of God and the perdition of souls, knowing that by this means God is
       made more angry and allows them greater power of doing evil; and because they do indeed
       perpetuate countless witchcrafts which the devil would not be allowed to bring upon men if he
       wished to injure men alone by himself, but are permitted, in the just and hidden purpose of God,
       through the agency of witches, on account of their perfidy and abjuration of the Catholic Faith;
       therefore such injuries are justly ascribed to witches secondarily, however much the devil may be
       the principal actor.
             Therefore when a woman dips a twig in water and sprinkles the water in the air to make it
       rain, although she does not herself cause the rain, and could not be blamed on that account, yet,
       because she has entered into a pact with the devil by which she can do this as a witch, although it
       is the devil who causes the rain, she herself nevertheless deservedly bears the blame, because she
       is an infidel and does the devil's work, surrendering herself to his service.
             So also when a witch makes a waxen image or some such thing in order to bewitch
       somebody; or when an image of someone appears by pouring molten lead into water, and some
       injury is done upon the image, such as piercing it or hurting it in any other way, when it is the
       bewitched man who is in imagination being hurt; although the injury is actually done to the image
       by some witch or some other man, and the devil in the same manner invisibly injures the
       bewitched man, yet it is deservedly ascribed to the witch. For, without her, God would never allow
       the devil to inflict the injury, nor would the devil on his own account try to injure the man.
             But because it has been said that in the matter of their good name the devils can injure men on
       the own account and without the co-operation of witches, there may arise a doubt whether the
       devils cannot also defame honest women so that they are reputed to be witches, when they appear
       in their likeness to bewitch someone; from which it would happen that such a woman would be
       defamed without cause.
             In answering this we must premise a few remarks. First, it has been said that the devil can do
       nothing without the Divine permission, as is shown in the First Part of this work in the last
       Question. It has also been shown that God does not allow so great power of evil against the just


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a11a.html (2 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:29 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter XI

       and those who live in grace, as against sinners; and as the devils have more power against sinners
       (see the text: When a strong man armed, etc.) so they are permitted by God to afflict them more
       than the just. Finally, although they can, with God's permission, injure the just in their affairs, their
       reputation, and their bodily health, yet, because they know that this power is granted them chiefly
       for the increase of the merits of the just, they are the less eager to injure them.
              Therefore it can be said that in this difficulty there are several points to be considered. First,
       the Divine permission. Secondly, the man who is thought to be righteous, for they who are so
       reputed are not always actually in a state of grace. Thirdly, the crime of which an innocent man
       would be suspected; for that crime in its very origin exceeds all the crimes of the world. Therefore
       it is to be said that it is granted that, with God's permission, an innocent person, whether or not he
       is in a state of grace, may be injured in his affairs to this particular crime and the gravity of the
       accusation (for we have often quoted S. Isidore's saying that they are called witches from the
       magnitude of their crimes), it can be said that for an innocent person to be defamed by the devil in
       a way that has been suggested does not seem at all possible, for many reasons.
              In the first place, it is one thing to be defamed in respect of vices which are committed
       without any expressed or tacit contract with the devil, such as theft, robbery, or fornication; but
       quite another matter to be defamed in respect of vices which it is impossible to accuse a man of
       having perpetrated unless he has entered upon an expressed contract with the devil; and such are
       the works of witches, which cannot be laid at their door unless it is by the power of devils that they
       bewitch men, animals and the fruits of the earth. Therefore, although the devil can blacken men's
       reputations in respect of other vices, yet it does not seem possible for him to do so in respect of
       this vice which cannot be perpetrated without his co-operation.
              Besides, it has never hitherto been known to have happened that an innocent person has been
       defamed by the devil to such an extent that he was condemned to death for this particular crime.
       Furthermore, when a person is only under suspicion, he suffers no punishment except that which
       the Canon prescribes for his purgation, as will be shown in the Third Part of this work in the
       second method of sentencing witches.
              And it is set down there that, if such a man fails in his purgation, he is to be considered guilty,
       but that he should be solemnly adjured before the punishment due to his sin is proceeded with and
       enforced. But here we are dealing with actual events; and it has never yet been known that an
       innocent person has been punished on suspicion of witchcraft, and there is no doubt that God will
       never permit such a thing to happen.
              Besides, He does not suffer the innocent who are under Angelic protection to be suspected of
       smaller crimes, such as robbery and such things; then all the more will He preserve those who are
       under that protection from suspicion of the crime of witchcraft.
              And it is no valid objection to quote the legend of S. Germanius, when devils assumed the
       bodies of other women and sat down at table and slept with the husbands, deluding the latter into
       the belief that those women were in their own bodies eating and drinking with them, as we have
       mentioned before. For the women in this case are not to be held guiltless. For in the Canon
       (Episcopi 26. q. 2) such women are condemned for thinking that they are really and actually
       transported, when they are so only in imagination; although, as we have shown above, they are at
       times bodily transported by devils.
              But our present proposition is that they can, with God's permission, cause all other infirmities,
       with no exception; and it is to be concluded from what we have said that this is so. For no
       exception is made by the Doctors, and there is no reason why there should be any, since, as we


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a11a.html (3 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:29 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter XI

       have often said, the natural power of devils is superior to all corporeal power. And we have found
       in our experience that this is true. For although greater difficulty may be felt in believing that
       witches are able to cause leprosy or epilepsy, since these diseases arise from some long-standing
       physical predisposition or defect, none the less it has sometimes been found that even these have
       been caused by witchcraft. For in the diocese of Basel, in the district of Alsace and Lorraine, a
       certain honest labourer spoke roughly to a certain quarrelsome woman, and she angrily threatened
       him that she would soon avenge herself on him. He took little notice of her; but on the same night
       he felt a pustule grow upon his neck, and he rubbed it a little, and found his whole face and neck
       puffed up and swollen, and a horrible form of leprosy appeared all over his body. He immediately
       went to his friends for advice, and told them of the woman's threat, and said that he would stake
       his life on the suspicion that this had been done to him by the magic art of that same witch. In
       short, the woman was taken, questioned, and confessed her crimes. But when the judge asked her
       particularly about the reason for it, and how she had done it, she answered: “When that man used
       abusive words to me, I was angry and went home; and my familiar began to ask the reason for my
       ill humour. I told him, and begged him to avenge me on the man. And he asked what I wanted him
       to do to him; and I answered that I wished he would always have a swollen face. And the devil
       went away and afflicted the man even beyond my asking; for I had not hoped that he would infect
       him with such sore leprosy.” And so the woman was burned.
             And in the diocese of Constance, between Breisach and Freiburg, there is a leprous woman
       (unless she has paid the debt of all flesh within these two years) who used to tell to many people
       how the same thing had happened to her by reason of a similar quarrel which took place between
       her and another woman. For one night when she went out of the house to do something in front of
       the door, a warm wind came from the house of the other woman, which was opposite, and
       suddenly struck her face; and from that time she had been afflicted with the leprosy which she now
       suffered.
             And lastly, in the same diocese, in the territory of the Black Forest, a witch was being lifted
       by a gaoler on to the pile of wood prepared for her burning, and she said: ”I will pay you”; and
       blew into his face. And he was at once afflicted with a horrible leprosy all over his body, and did
       not survive many days. For the sake of brevity, the fearful crimes of this witch, and many more
       instances could be recounted, are omitted. For we have often found that certain people have been
       visited with epilepsy or the falling sickness by means of eggs which have been buried with dead
       bodies, especially the dead bodies of witches, together with other ceremonies of which we cannot
       speak, particularly when these eggs have been given to a person either in food or drink.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                   Question I, Chapter XII

                                                      Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a11a.html (4 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:29 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter XI

                                                           All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a11a.html (5 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:29 PM]
Notes

           “Book of Precepts.” “Praeceptorum diuinae legis Liber,” of which there were seventeen
        editions before 1500. I have used that of Douai, 1612.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2027.html [2002-01-20 12:03:30 PM]
Notes

            “Sigisbert.” Sigebert of Bembloux, the celebrated Benedictine historian, was born at Gembloux
        (pr. Namur) about 1035, and died at the same place, 5 November, 1112. He was a prolific author,
        and his most famous work, “Chronicon siue Chronographia,” is the basis of many other histories.
        It has frequently been reprinted. The works of Sigebert may be conveniently found in Migne,
        “Patres Latini,” CLX. There is a study by Hirsh, “De uita et scriptis Sigeberti Monachi
        Gemblacensis,” Berlin, 1841.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2028.html [2002-01-20 12:03:30 PM]
Notes

          “Louis II.” Son of Lothaire I, was born about 822. He became associated with his father in the
        Empire in 849, and succeeded to the Imperial Crown in 855. He died in 875.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2029.html [2002-01-20 12:03:30 PM]
Notes

           “Strong Man.” “S. Luke” xi, 21.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2030.html [2002-01-20 12:03:30 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter XII


                                  THE
                          MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                       PART II, QUESTION I.
                                                          CHAPTER XII
                     Of the Way how in Particular they Afflict Men with Other Like Infirmities.

             But who can reckon the number of infirmities which they have inflicted upon men, such as
       blindness, the sharpest pains, and contortions of the body? Yet we shall set down a few examples
       which we have seen with our eyes, or have been related to one of us Inquisitors.
             When an inquisition was being held on some witches in the town of Innsbruck, the following
       case, among others, was brought to light. A certain honest woman who had been legally married to
       one of the household of the Archduke formally deposed the following. In the time of her
       maidenhood she had been in the service of one of the citizens, whose wife became afflicted with
       grievous pains in the head; and a woman came who said she could cure her, and so began certain
       incantations and rites which she said would assuage the pains. And I carefully watched (said this
       woman) what she did, and saw that, against the nature of water poured into a vase, she caused
       water to rise in its vessel, together with other ceremonies which there is no need to mention. And
       considering that the pains in my mistress' head were not assuaged by these means, I addressed the
       witch in some indignation with these words: “I do not know what you are doing, but whatever it is,
       it is witchcraft, and you are doing it for your own profit.” Then the witch at once replied: “You
       will know in three days whether I am a witch or not.” And so it proved; for on the third day when I
       sat down and took up a spindle, I suddenly felt a terrible pain in my body. First it was inside me,
       so that it seemed that there was no part of my body in which I did not feel horrible shooting pains;
       then it seemed to me just as if burning coals were being continually heaped upon my head; thirdly,
       from the crown of my head to the soles of my feet there was no place large enough for a pinprick
       that was not covered with a rash of white pustules; and so I remained in these pains, crying out and
       wishing only for death, until the fourth day. At last my mistress' husband told me to go to a certain
       tavern; and with great difficulty I went, whilst he walked before, until we were in front of the
       tavern. “See!” he said to me; “there is a loaf of white bread over the tavern door.” “I see,” said I.
       Then he said: “Take it down, if you possibly can, for it may do you good.” And I, holding on to the
       door with one hand as much as I could, got hold of the loaf with the other. “Open it” (said my
       master) “and look carefully at what is inside.” Then, when I had broken open the loaf, I found
       many things inside it, especially some white grains very like the pustules on my body; and I saw
       also some seeds and herbs such as I could not eat or even look at, with the bones of serpents and
       other animals. In my astonishment I asked my master what was to be done; and he told me to
       throw it all into the fire. I did so; and behold! suddenly, not in an hour or even a few minutes, but
       at the moment when that matter was thrown into the fire, I regained all my former health.
             And much more was deposed against the wife of the citizen in whose service this woman had
       been, by reason of which she was not lightly but very strongly suspected, and especially because
       she had used great familiarity with known witches. It is presumed that, having knowledge of the
       spell of witchcraft hidden in the loaf, she had told it to her husband; and then, in the way

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a12a.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:31 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter XII

       described, the maid-servant recovered her health.
              To bring so great a crime into detestation, it is well that we should tell how another person,
       also a woman, was bewitched in the same town. An honest married woman deposed the following
       an oath.
              Behind my house (she said) I have a greenhouse, and my neighbour's garden borders on it.
       One day I noticed that a passage had been made from my neighbour's garden to my greenhouse,
       not without some damage being cause; and as I was standing in the door of my greenhouse
       reckoning to myself and bemoaning both the passage and the damage, my neighbour suddenly
       came up and asked if I suspected her. But I was frightened because of her bad reputation, and only
       answered, “The footprints on the grass are proof of the damage.” Then she was indignant because I
       had not, as she hoped, accused her with the actionable words, and went away murmuring; and
       though I could hear her words, I could not understand them. After a few days I became very ill
       with pains in the stomach, and the sharpest twinges shooting from my left side to my right, and
       conversely, as if two swords or knives were thrust through my breast; whence day and night I
       disturbed all the neighbours with my cries. And when they came from all sides to console me, it
       happened that a certain clay-worker, who was engaged in an adulterous intrigue with the witch, my
       neighbour, coming to visit me, took pity on my illness, and after a few words of comfort went
       away. But the next day he returned in a hurry, and, after consoling me, added: “I am going to test
       whether your illness is due to witchcraft, and if I find that it is, I shall restore your health.” So he
       took some molten lead and, while I was lying in bed, poured it into a bowl of water which he
       placed on my body. And when the lead solidified into a certain image and various shapes, he said:
       “See! your illness has been caused by witchcraft; and one of the instruments of that witchcraft is
       hidden under the threshold of your house door. Let us go, then, and remove it, and you will feel
       better.” So my husband and he went to remove the charm; and the clay-worker, taking up the
       threshold, told my husband to put his hand into the hold which then appeared, and take out
       whatever he found; and he did so. And first he brought out a waxen image about a palm long,
       perforated all over, and pierced through the sides with two needles, just in the same way that I felt
       the stabbing pains from side to side; and then little bags containing all sorts of things, such as
       grains and seeds and bones. And when all these things were burned, I became better, but not
       entirely well. For although the shootings and twinges stopped, and I quite regained my appetite for
       food, yet even now I am by no means fully restored to health. — And when we asked her why it
       was that she had not been completely restored, she answered: There are some other instruments of
       witchcraft hidden away which I cannot find. And when I asked the man how he knew where the
       first instruments were hidden, he answered: “I knew this through the love which prompts a friend
       to tell things to a friend; for your neighbour revealed this to me when she was coaxing me to
       commit adultery with her.” This is the story of the sick woman.
              But if I were to tell all the instances that were found in that one town I should need to make a
       book of them. For countless men and women who were blind, or lame, or withered, or plagued
       with various infirmities, severally took their oath that they had strong suspicions that their
       illnesses, both in general and in particular, were caused by witches, and that they were bound to
       endure those ills either for a period or right up to their deaths. And all that they said and testified
       was true, either as regards a specified illness or as regards a specified illness or as regards the
       death of others. For that country abounds in henchmen and knights who have leisure for vice, and
       seduce women, and then wish to cast them off when they desire to marry an honest woman. But
       they can rarely do this without incurring the vengeance of some witchcraft upon themselves or
       their wives. For when those women see themselves despised, they persist in tormenting not so

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a12a.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:31 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter XII

       much the husband as the wife, in the fond hope that, if the wife should die, the husband would
       return to his former mistress.
             For when a cook of the Archduke had married an honest girl from a foreign country, a witch,
       who had been his mistress, met them in the public road and, in the hearing of other honest people,
       foretold the bewitching and death of the girl, stretching out her hand and saying: “Not for long will
       you rejoice in your husband.” And at once, on the following day, she took to her bed, and after a
       few days paid the debt of all flesh, exclaiming just as she expired: Lo! thus I die, because that
       woman, with God's permission, has killed me by her witchcraft; yet verily I go to another and
       better marriage with God.
             In the same way, according to the evidence of public report, a certain soldier was slain by
       witchcraft, and many others whom I omit to mention.
             But among them there was a well-known gentleman, whom his mistress wished to come to
       her on one occasion to pass the night; but he sent his servant to tell her that he could not visit her
       that night because he was busy. She promptly flew into a rage, and said to the servant: Go and tell
       your master that he will not trouble me for long. On the very next day he was taken ill, and he was
       buried within a week.
             And there are witches who can bewitch their judges by a mere look or glance from their eyes,
       and publicly boast that they cannot be punished; and when malefactors have been imprisoned for
       their crimes, and exposed to the severest torture to make them tell the truth, these witches can
       endow them with such an obstinacy of preserving silence that they are unable to lay bare their
       crimes.
             And there are some who, in order to accomplish their evil charms and spells, beat and stab the
       Crucifix, and utter the filthiest words against the Purity of the Most Glorious Virgin MARY,
       casting the foulest aspersions on the Nativity of Our Saviour from Her inviolate womb. It is not
       expedient to repeat those vile words, nor yet to describe their detestable crimes, as the narrative
       would give too great offence to the ears of the pious; but they are all kept and preserved in writing,
       detailing the manner in which a certain baptized Jewess had instructed other young girls. And one
       of them, named Walpurgis, being in the same year at the point of death, and being urged by those
       who stood round her to confess her sins, exclaimed: I have given myself body and soul to the
       devil; there is no hope of forgiveness for me; and so died.
             These particulars have not been written to the shame, but rather to the praise and glory of the
       most illustrious Archduke. For he was truly a Catholic Prince, and laboured very zealously with
       the Church at Brixen to exterminate witches. But they are written rather in hate and loathing of so
       great a crime, and that men may not cease to avenge their wrongs, and the insults and offences
       these wretches offer to the Creator and our Holy Faith, to say nothing of the temporal losses which
       they cause. For this is their greatest and gravest crime, namely, that they abjure the Faith.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                  Question I, Chapter XIII

                                                      Main Index




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a12a.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:31 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter XII

                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                         HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                 All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a12a.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:31 PM]
 Part II, Question I, Chapter XIII


                                   THE
                           MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                        PART II, QUESTION I.
                                                          CHAPTER XIII
How Witch Midwives commit most Horrid Crimes when they either Kill Children or Offer them to Devils
                                    in most Accursed Wise.

              We must not omit to mention the injuries done to children by witch midwives, first by
        killing them, and secondly by blasphemously offering them to devils. In the diocese of
        Strasburg and in the town of Zabern there is an honest woman very devoted to the Blessed
        Virgin MARY, who tells the following experience of hers to all the guests that come to the
        tavern which she keeps, known by the sign of the Black Eagle.
              I was, she says, pregnant by my lawful husband, now dead, and as my time
        approached, a certain midwife importuned me to engage her to assist at the birth of my
        child. But I knew her bad reputation, and although I had decided to engage another woman,
        pretended with conciliatory words to agree to her request. But when the pains came upon
        me, and I had brought in another midwife, the first one was very angry, and hardly a week
        later came into my room one night with two other women, and approached the bed where I
        was lying. And when I tried to call my husband, who was sleeping in another room, all the
        use was taken away from my limbs and tongue, so that except for seeing and hearing I could
        not move a muscle. And the witch, standing between the other two, said: “See! this vile
        woman, who would not take me for her midwife, shall not win through unpunished.” The
        other two standing be her pleaded for me, saying: “She has never harmed any of us.” But the
        witch added: “Because she has offended me I am going to put something into her entrails;
        but, to please you, she shall not feel any pain for half a year, but after that time she shall be
        tortured enough.” So she came up and touched my belly with her hands; and it seemed to me
        that she took out my entrails, and put in something which, however, I could not see. And
        when they had gone away, and I had recovered my power of speech, I called my husband as
        soon as possible, and told him what had happened. But he put it down to pregnancy, and
        said: “You pregnant women are always suffering from fancies and delusions.” And when he
        would by no means believe me, I replied: “I have been given six months' grace, and if, after
        that time, no torment comes to me, I shall believe you.”
              She related this to her son, a cleric who was then Archdeacon of the district, and who
        came to visit her on the same day. And what happened? When exactly six months had
        passed, such a terrible pain came into her belly that she could not help disturbing everybody
        with her cries day and night. And because, as has been said, she was most devout to the
        Virgin, the Queen of Mercy, she fasted with bread and water every Saturday, so that she
        believed that she was delivered by Her intercession. For one day, when she wanted to
        perform an action of nature, all those unclean things fell from her body; and she called her
        husband and son, and said: “Are those fancies? Did I not say that after a half a year the truth
        would be known? Or who ever saw me ear thorns, bones, and even bits of wood?” For there

 file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a13a.html (1 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:32 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter XIII

       were brambles as long as a palm, as well as a quantity of other things.
             Moreover (as was said in the First Part of the work), it was shown by the confession of
       the servant, who was brought to judgement at Breisach, that the greatest injuries to the Faith
       as regards the heresy of witches are done by midwives; and this is made clearer than
       daylight itself by the confessions of some who were afterwards burned.
             For in the diocese of Basel at the town of Dann, a witch who was burned confessed that
       she had killed more than forty children, by sticking a needle through the crowns of their
       heads into their brains, as they came out from the womb.
             Finally, another woman in the diocese of Strasburg confessed that she had killed more
       children than she could count. And she was caught in this way. She had been called from
       one town to another to act as midwife to a certain woman, and, having performed her office,
       was going back home. But as she went out of the town gate, the arm of a newly born child
       fell out of the cloak she had wrapped around her, in whose folds the arm had been
       concealed. This was seen by those who were sitting in the gateway, and when she had gone
       on, they picked up from the ground what they took to be a piece of meat; but when they
       looked more closely and saw that it was not a piece of meat, but recognized it by its fingers
       as a child's arm, they reported it to the magistrates, and it was found that a child had died
       before baptism, lacking an arm. So the witch was taken and questioned, and confessed the
       crime, and that she had, as has been said, killed more children than she could count.
             Now the reason for such practices is as follows: It is to be presumed that witches are
       compelled to do such things at the command of evil spirits, and sometimes against their own
       wills. For the devil knows that, because of the pain of loss, or original sin, such children are
       debarred from entering the Kingdom of Heaven. And by this means the Last Judgement is
       delayed, when the devils will be condemned to eternal torture; since the number of the elect
       os more slowly completed, on the fulfilment of which the world will be consumed. And
       also, as has already been shown, witches are taught by the devil to confect from the limbs of
       such children an unguent which is very useful for their spells.
             But in order to bring so great a sin into utter detestation, we must not pass over in
       silence the following horrible crime. For when they do not kill the child, they
       blasphemously offer it to the devil in this manner. As soon as the child is born, the midwife,
       if the mother herself is not a witch, carries it out of the room on the pretext of warming it,
       raises it up, and offers it to the Prince of Devils, that is Lucifer, and to all the devils. And
       this is done by the kitchen fire.
             A certain man relates that he noticed that his wife, when her time came to give birth,
       against the usual custom of women in childbirth, did not allow any woman to approach the
       bed except her own daughter, who acted as midwife. Wishing to know the reason for this, he
       hid himself in the house and saw the whole order of the sacrilege and dedication to the devil,
       as it has been described. He saw also, as it seemed to him, that without any human support,
       but by the power of the devil, the child was climbing up the chain by which the
       cooking-pots were suspended. In great consternation both at the terrible words of the
       invocation of the devils, and at the other iniquitous ceremonies, he strongly insisted that the
       child should be baptized immediately. While it was being carried to the next village, where
       there was a church, and when they had to cross a bridge over a certain river, he drew his
       sword and ran at his daughter, who was carrying the child, saying in the hearing of two
       others who were with them: “You shall not carry the child over the bridge; for either it must


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a13a.html (2 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:32 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter XIII

       cross the bridge by itself, or you shall be drowned in the river.” The daughter was terrified
       and, together with the other women in company, asked him if he were in his right mind (for
       he had hidden what had happened from all the others except the two men who were with
       him). Then he answered: “You vile drab, by your magic arts you made the child climb the
       chain in the kitchen; now make it cross the bridge with no on carrying it, or I shall drown
       you in the river.” And so, being compelled, she put the child down on the bridge, and
       invoked the devil by her art; and suddenly the child was seen on the other side of the bridge.
       And when the child had been baptized, and he had returned home, since he now had
       witnesses to convict his daughter of witchcraft (for he could not prove the former crime of
       the oblation to the devil, inasmuch as he had been the only witness of the sacrilegious
       ritual), he accused bother daughter and mother before the judge after their period of
       purgation; and they were both burned, and the crime of midwives of making that
       sacrilegious offering was discovered.
             But here the doubt arises: to what end or purpose is the sacrilegious offering of
       children, and how does it benefit the devils? To this it can be said that the devils do this for
       three reasons, which serve three most wicked purposes. The first reason arises from their
       pride, which always increases; as it is said: “They that hate Thee have lifted up the head.”
       For they try as far as possible to conform with divine rites and ceremonies. Secondly, they
       can more easily deceive men under the mask of an outwardly seeming pious action. For in
       the same way they entice young virgins and boys into their power; for though they might
       solicit such by means of evil and corrupt men, yet they rather deceive them by magic
       mirrors and reflections seen in witches' finger-nails, and lure them on in the belief that they
       love chastity, whereas they hate it. For the devil hates above all the Blessed Virgin, because
       she bruised his head. Just so in this oblation of children they deceive the minds of witches
       into the vice of infidelity under the appearance of a virtuous acts. And the third reason is,
       that the perfidy of witches may grow, to the devils' own gain, when they have witches
       dedicated to them from their very cradles.
             And this sacrilege affects the child in three ways. In the first place, visible offerings to
       God are made of visible things, such as wine of bread or the fruits of the earth, as a sign of
       honour and subjection to Him, as it is said in Ecclesiasticus xxv: Thou shalt not appear
       empty before the Lord. And such offerings cannot and must not afterwards be put to profane
       uses. Therefore the holy Father, S. John Damascene, says: The oblations which are offered
       in church belong only to the priests, but not that they should divert them to their own uses,
       but that they should faithfully distribute them, partly in the observance of divine worship,
       and partly for the use of the poor. From this it follows that a child who has been offered to
       the devil in sign of subjection and homage to him cannot possibly be dedicated by Catholics
       to a holy life, in worthy and fruitful service to God for the benefit of himself and others.
             For who can say that the sins of the mothers and of other do not redound in punishment
       upon the children? Perhaps someone will quote that saying of the prophet: “The sons shall
       not bear the iniquity of the father.” But there is that other passage in Exodus xx: I am a
       jealous God, visiting the sins of the father upon the children unto the third and fourth
       generation. Now the meaning of these two sayings is as follows. The first speaks of spiritual
       punishment in the judgement of Heaven or God, and not in the judgement of men. And this
       is the punishment of the soul, such as loss or the forfeiture of glory, or the punishment of
       pain, that is, of the torment of eternal fire. And with such punishments no one is punished


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a13a.html (3 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:32 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter XIII

       except for his own sin, either inherited as original sin or committed as actual sin.
             The second text speaks of those who imitate the sins of their father, as Gratian has
       explained (I, q. 4, etc.); and there he gives other explanations as to how the judgement of
       God inflicts other punishments on a man, not only for his own sins which he has committed,
       or which he might commit (but is prevented by punishment from committing), but also for
       the sins of others.
             And it cannot be argued that when a man is punished without cause, and without sin,
       which should be the cause of punishment. For according to the rule of law, no one must be
       punished without sin, unless there is some cause of punishment. And we can say that there is
       always a most just cause, though it may not be known to us: see S. Augustine, XXIV, 4.
       And if we cannot in the result penetrate the depth of God's judgement, yet we know that
       what He has said is true, and what He has done is just.
             But there is this distinction to be observed in innocent children who are offered to
       devils not by their mothers when they are witches, but by midwives who, as we have said,
       secretly take from the embrace and the womb of an honest mother. Such children are not so
       cut off from grace that they must necessarily become prone to such crimes; but it is piously
       to be believed that they may rather cultivate their mothers' virtues.
             The second result to the children of this sacrilege is as follows. When a man offers
       himself as a sacrifice to God, he recognizes God as his Beginning and his End; and this
       sacrifice is more worthy than all the external sacrifices which he makes, having its
       beginning in his creation and its end in his glorification, as it is said: A sacrifice to God is an
       afflicted spirit, etc. In the same way, when a witch offers a child to the devils, she
       commends it body and soul to him as its beginning and its end in eternal damnation;
       wherefore not without some miracle can the child be set free from the payment of so great a
       debt.
             And we read often in history of children whom their mothers, in some passion or
       mental disturbance, have unthinkingly offered to the devil from the very womb, and how it
       is only with the very greatest difficulty that they can, when they have grown to adult age, be
       delivered from that bondage which the devil has, with God's permission, usurped to himself.
       And of this the Book of Examples, Most Blessed Virgin MARY, affords many illustrations; a
       notable instance being that of the man whom the Supreme Pontiff was unable to deliver
       from the torments of the devil, but at last he was sent to a holy man living in the East, and
       finally with great difficulty was delivered from his bondage through the intercession of the
       Most Glorious Virgin Herself.
             And if God so severely punishes even such a thoughtless, I will not say sacrifice, but
       commendation used angrily by a mother when her husband, after copulating with her, says, I
       hope a child will come of it; and she answers, May the child go to the devil! How much
       greater must be the punishment when the Divine Majesty is offended in the way we have
       described!
                                                                 Page 1 of 2




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a13a.html (4 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:32 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter XIII

                                    Question I, Chapter XIII continued . . . .

                                                      Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                         HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                 All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a13a.html (5 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:32 PM]
Notes

           “Pain of loss.” Poena damni.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2031.html [2002-01-20 12:03:32 PM]
Notes

           “Head.” “Psalm” lxxxii, 2.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2032.html [2002-01-20 12:03:32 PM]
Notes

           “Genesis.” Inimicitias ponam inter te et mulierem, et semen tuum et semen illius: ipsa conteret
        caput tuum, et tu insidiaberis calcaneo eius.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2033.html [2002-01-20 12:03:32 PM]
Notes

           “Gratian.” The little that is known concerning the author of the “Concordantia discordantium
        canonum,” more generally called the “Decretum Gratiani,” must be gathered from the work itself.
        Gratian was born in Italy, perhaps at Chiusi. He became a Camaldolese monk and taught at
        Balogna. It is uncertain at what time he compiled the “Decretum,” but it was commonly held to
        have been completed in 1151. More recent authorities, however, are inclined to suggest 1140.
        Gratian died before 1179, some think as early as 1160. He is regarded as the true found of the
        science of canon law.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2034.html [2002-01-20 12:03:33 PM]
Notes

           “Spirit.” “Psalm” l, 19.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2035.html [2002-01-20 12:03:33 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter XIII


                                  THE
                          MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                    PART II, QUESTION I.
                                                  CHAPTER XIII CONTINUED

             The third effect of this sacrilegious oblation is to inculcate an habitual inclination to
       cast spells upon men, animals, and the fruits of the earth. This is shown by S. Thomas in the
       2nd Book, quest, 108, where he speaks of temporal punishment, how some are punished for
       the sins of others. For he says that, bodily speaking, sons are part of their fathers'
       possessions, and servants and animals belong to their masters; therefore when a man is
       punished in all his possessions, it follows that often the sons suffer for the fathers.
             And this is quite a different matter from what has been said about God visiting the sins
       of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation. For there it is a
       question of those who imitate their fathers' sins, but here we speak of those who suffer
       instead of their fathers, when they do not imitate their sins by committing them in fact, but
       only inherit the results of their sins. For in this way the son born to David in adultery died
       very soon; and the animals of the Amalekites were ordered to be killed. Nevertheless, there
       is much mystery in all this.
             Taking into consideration all that we have said, we may well conclude that such
       children are always, up to the end of their lives, predisposed to the perpetration of
       witchcraft. For just as God sanctifies that which is dedicated to Him, as is proved by the
       deeds of the Saints, when parents offer to God the fruit which they have generated; so also
       the devil does not cease to infect with evil that which is offered to him. Many examples can
       be found in the Old and New Testaments. For so were many of the Patriarchs and Prophets,
       such as Isaac, Samuel, and Samson; and so were Alexis and Nicolas, and many more,
       guided by much grace to a holy life.
             Finally, we know from experience that the daughters of witches are always suspected
       of similar practises, as imitators of their mothers' crimes; and that indeed the whole of a
       witch's progeny is infected. And the reason for this and for all that has been said before is,
       that according to their pact with the devil, they always have to leave behind them and
       carefully instruct a survivor, so that they may fulfil their vow to do all they can to increase
       the number of witches. For how else could it happen, as it has very often been found, that
       tender girls of eight or ten years have raised up tempests and hailstorms, unless they had
       been dedicated to the devil under such a pact by their mothers. For the children could not do
       such things of themselves by abjuring the Faith, which is how all adult witches have to
       begin, since they have no knowledge of any single article of the Faith. We will recount an
       example of such a child.
             In the duchy of Swabia a certain farmer went to his fields with his little daughter,
       hardly eight years old, to look at his crops, and began complaining about the drought,
       saying: Alas! when will it rain? The girl heard him, and in the simplicity of her heart said:
       Father, if you want it to rain, I can soon make it come. And her father said to her: What? Do


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a13b.html (1 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:03:33 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter XIII

       you know how to make it rain? And the girl answered: I can make it rain, and I can make
       hailstorms and tempests too. And the father asked: Who taught you? And she answered: My
       mother did, but she told me not to tell anybody. Then the father asked: How did she teach
       you? And she answered: She sent me to a master who will do anything I ask at any time. But
       her father said: Have you ever seen him? And she said: I have sometimes seen men coming
       in and out to my mother; and when I asked her who they were, she told that they were our
       masters to whom she had given me, and that they were powerful and rich patrons. The father
       was terrified, and asked her if she could raise a hailstorm then. And the girl said: Yes, if I
       had a little water. Then he led the girl by the hand to a stream, and said: Do it, but only on
       our land. Then the girl put her hand in the water and stirred it in the name of her master, as
       her mother had taught her; and behold! the rain fell only on that land. Seeing this, the father
       said: Make it hail now, but only on one of our fields. And when the girl had done this, the
       father was convinced by the evidence, and accused his wife before the judge. And the wife
       was taken and convicted and burned; but the daughter was reconciled and solemnly
       dedicated to God, since which hour she could no more work these spells and charms.
                                                                 Page 2 of 2


                                                  Question I, Chapter XIV

                                                      Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                         HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                 All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a13b.html (2 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:03:33 PM]
Notes

           “Alexis.” S. Alexis, Confessor. Feast, 17 July. The Basilica and title-church of SS. Bonifacio ed
        Alessio all’ Aventino, Rome, contains the bodies of S. Boniface and S. Alexis under the High Altar.
        S. Aglae is buried in the confessional.
           S. Nicolas of Tolentino, O.S.A., circa 1246-1306. was born of gentlefolk, Compagnonus de
        Guarutti and Amata de Guidiani, pious and devout, living in great seclusion on very moderate
        means. He was the child of prayer, his mother being advanced in years and vowing her son,
        should she bare one, to God from the womb. His parents joyfully consented to his joining the
        Order of Augustinian Hermits, of which he is one of the greatest glories. S. Nicolas was
        distinguished by angelic meekness and celestial purity. He died 10 September, and his feast is
        celebrated on that day.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2036.html [2002-01-20 12:03:33 PM]
Notes

            “Number of Witches.” Francesco Maria Guazzo, “Compendium Maleficarum,” Milan, 1608,
        tells us that the witches promise the devil “to strive with all their power and to use every
        inducement and endeavour to draw other men and women to their detestable practices and the
        worship of Satan.” So in the case of Janet Breadheid of Auldearne it was her husband who
        “enticed her into that craft.” (Pitcairn, “Criminal Trials,” Edinburgh, 1833.) At Salem, George
        Burroughs, a minister, was accused by a large number of women as “the person who had Seduc'd
        and Compell'd them into the snares of Witchcraft.” See my “History of Witchcraft,” Chap. III, pp.
        83-84.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2037.html [2002-01-20 12:03:34 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter XIV


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                       PART II, QUESTION I.
                                                         CHAPTER XIV
                               Here followeth how Witches Injure Cattle in Various Ways.

             When S. Paul said, Doth God care for oxen? he meant that, though all things are
       subject to Divine providence, both man and beast each in its degree, as the Psalmist says, yet
       the sons of men are especially in His governance and under the protection of His wings. I
       say, therefore, if men are injured by witches, with God's permission, both the innocent and
       just as well as sinners, and if parents are bewitched in their children, as being part of their
       possessions, who can then presume to doubt that, with God's permission, various injuries
       can be brought by witches upon cattle and the fruits of the earth, which are also part of
       men's possessions? For so was Job stricken by the devil and lost all his cattle. So also there
       is not even the smallest farm where women do not injure each other's cows, by drying up
       their milk, and very often killing them.
             But first let us consider the smallest of these injuries, that of drying up the milk. If it is
       asked how they can do this, it can be answered that, according to Blessed Albert in his Book
       on Animals, milk is naturally menstrual in any animal; and, like another flux in women,
       when it is not stopped by some natural infirmity, it is due to witchcraft that it is stopped.
       Now the flow of milk is naturally stopped when the animal becomes pregnant; and it is
       stopped by an accidental infirmity when the animal eats some herb the nature of which is to
       dry up the milk and make the cow ill.
             But they can cause this in various ways by witchcraft. For on the more holy nights
       according to the instructions of the devil and for the greater offence to the Divine Majesty of
       God, a witch will sit down in a corner of her house with a pail between her legs, stick a
       knife or some instrument in the wall or a post, and make as if to milk it with her hands. Then
       she summons her familiar who always works with her in everything, and tells him that she
       wishes to milk a certain cow from a certain house, which is healthy and abounding in milk.
       And suddenly the devil takes the milk from the udder of that cow, and brings it to where the
       witch is sitting, as if it were flowing from the knife.
             But when this is publicly preached to the people they get no bad information by it; for
       however much anyone may invoke the devil, and think that by this alone he can do this
       thing, he deceives himself, because he is without the foundation of that perfidy, not having
       rendered homage to the devil or abjured the Faith. I have set this down because some have
       thought that several of the matter of which I have written ought not to be preacher to the
       people, on account of the danger of giving them evil knowledge; whereas it is impossible for
       anyone to learn from a preacher how to perform any of the things that have been mentioned.
       But they have been written rather to bring so great a crime into detestation, and should be
       preached from the pulpit, so that judges may be more eager to punish the horrible crime of
       the abnegation of the Faith. Yet they should not always be preached in this way; for the

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a14a.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:34 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter XIV

       secular mind pays more attention to temporal losses, being more concerned with earthly
       than spiritual matters; therefore when witches can be accused of inflicting temporal loss,
       judges are more zealous to punish them. But who can fathom the cunning of the devil?
             I know of some men in a certain city who wished to eat some May butter one May
       time. And as they were walking along they came to a meadow and say down by a stream;
       and one of them, who had formed some open or tacit pact with the devil, said: I will get you
       the best May butter. And at once he took off his clothes and went into the stream, not
       standing up but sitting with his back against the current; and while the others looked on, he
       uttered certain words, and moved the water with his hands behind his back; and in a short
       time he brought out a great quantity of butter of the sort that the country women sell in the
       market in May. And the others tasted it and declared that it was the very best butter.
             From this we can deduce first the following fact concerning their practices. They are
       either true witches, by reason of an expressed pact formed with the devil, or they know by
       some tacit understanding that the devil will do what they ask. In the first case there is no
       need for any discussion, for such are true witches. But in the second case, then they owed
       the devil's help to the fact that they were blasphemously offered to the devil by a midwife or
       by their own mothers.
             But it may be objected that the devil perhaps brought the butter without any compact,
       expressed or tacit, and without any previous dedication to himself. It is answered that no one
       can ever use the devil's help in such matters without invoking him; and that by that very act
       of seeking help from the devil he is an apostate from the Faith. This is the decision of S.
       Thomas in the Second Book of Sentences, dist. 8, on the question, Whether it is apostasy
       from the Faith to use the devil's help. And although Blessed Albert the Great agrees with the
       other Doctors, yet he says more expressly that in such matters there is always apostasy
       either in word or in deed. For if invocations, conjurations, fumigations and adorations are
       used, then an open pact is formed with the devil, even if there has been no surrender of body
       and soul together with explicit abjuration of the Faith either wholly or in part. For by the
       mere invocation of the devil a man commits open verbal apostasy. But if there is no spoken
       invocation, but only a bare action from which follows something that could not be done
       without the devil's help, then whether a man does it be beginning in the name of the devil, or
       with some other unknown words, or without any words but with that intention; then, says
       Blessed Albert, it is apostasy of deed, because that action is looked for from the devil. But
       since to expect or receive anything from the devil is always a disparagement of the Faith, it
       is also apostasy.
             So it is concluded that, by whatever means that sorcerer procured the butter, it was
       done with either a tacit or an expressed pact with the devil; and since, if it had been with an
       expressed pact, he would have behaved after the usual manner of witches, it is probably that
       there was a tacit or secret pact, originating either from himself or from his mother or a
       midwife. And I say that it arose from himself, since he only went through certain motions,
       and expected the devil to produce the effect.
             The second conclusion we can draw from this and similar practices is this. The devil
       cannot create new species of things; therefore when natural butter suddenly came out of the
       water, the devil did not do this by changing the water into milk, but by taking butter from
       some place where it was kept and bringing it to the man's hand. Or else he took natural milk
       from a natural cow and suddenly churned it into natural butter; for while the art of women
       takes a little time to make butter, the devil could do it in the shortest space of time and bring

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a14a.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:34 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter XIV

       it to the man.
              It is in the same way that certain dealers in magic, when they find themselves in need
       of wine or some such necessity, merely go out in the night with a flask or vessel, and bring it
       back suddenly filled with wine. For then the devil takes natural wine from some vessel and
       fills their flasks for them.
              And with regard to the manner whereby witches kill animals and cattle, it should be
       said that they act very much as they do in the case of men. They can bewitch them by a
       touch and a look, or by a look only; or by placing under the threshold of the stable door, or
       near the place where they go to water, some charm or periapt of witchcraft.
              For in this way those witches who were burned at Ratisbon, of whom we shall say
       more later on, were always incited by the devil to bewitch the best horses and the fattest
       cattle. And when they were asked how they did so, one of them named Agnes said that they
       hid certain things under the threshold of the stable door. And, asked what sort of things, she
       said: The bones of different kinds of animals. She was further asked in whose name they did
       this, and answered, In the name of the devil and all the other devils. And there was another
       of them, named Anna, who had killed twenty-three horses in succession belonging to one of
       the citizens who was a carrier. This man at last, when he had bought his twenty-fourth horse
       and reduced to extreme poverty, stood in his stable and said to the witch, who was standing
       in the door of her house: “See, I have bought a horse, and I swear to God and His Holy
       Mother that if this horse dies I shall kill you with my own hands.” At that the witch was
       frightened, and left the horse alone. But when she was taken and asked how she had done
       these things, she answered that she had done nothing but dig a little hole, after which the
       devil had put in it certain things unknown to her. From this it is concluded that the witch
       co-operates sufficiently if it is only by a touch or a look; for the devil is permitted no power
       of injuring creatures without some co-operation on the part of the witch, as has been shown
       before. And this is for the great offence to the Divine Majesty.
              For shepherds have often seen animals in the fields give three or four jumps into the
       air, and then suddenly fall to the ground and die; and this is caused by the power of witches
       at the instance of the devil.
              In the diocese of Strasburg, between the town of Fiessen and Mount Ferrer, a certain
       very rich man affirmed that more than forty oxen and cows belonging to him and others had
       been bewitched in the Alps within the space of one year, and that there had been no natural
       plague or sickness to cause it. To prove this, he said that when cattle die from some change
       plague or disease, they do not do so all at once, but by degrees; but that this witchcraft had
       suddenly taken all the strength from them, and therefore everyone judged that they had been
       killed by witchcraft. I have said forty head of cattle, but I believe he put the number higher
       than that. However, it is very true that many cattle are said to have been bewitched in some
       districts, especially in the Alps; and it is known that this form of witchcraft if unhappily
       most widespread. We shall consider some similar cases later, in the chapter where we
       discuss the remedies for cattle that have been bewitched.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a14a.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:34 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter XIV

                                                   Question I, Chapter XV

                                                      Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a14a.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:34 PM]
Notes

           “Oxen.” “I. Corinthians,” ix. 9.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2038.html [2002-01-20 12:03:35 PM]
Notes

           “Psalmist.” “Psalmists” xxxv, 7, 8.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2039.html [2002-01-20 12:03:35 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter XV


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                       PART II, QUESTION I.
                                                          CHAPTER XV
   How they Raise and Stir up Hailstorms and Tempests, and Cause Lightning to Blast both Men and
                                              Beasts.

            That devils and their disciples can by witchcraft cause lightnings and hailstorms and
       tempests, and that the devils have power from God to do this, and their disciples do so with
       God's permission, is proved by Holy Scripture in Job i and ii. For the devil received power
       from God, and immediately caused it to happen that the Sabeans took away from Job fifty
       yoke of oxen and five hundred asses, and then fire came from heaven and consumed seven
       thousand camels, and a great wind came and smote down this house, killing his seven sons
       and his three daughters, and all the young men, that is to say, the servants, except him who
       brought the news, were killed; and finally the devil smote the body of the holy man with the
       most terrible sores, and caused his wife and his three friends to vex him grievously.
            S. Thomas in his commentary on Job says as follows: It must be confessed that, with
       God's permission, the devils can disturb the air, raise up winds, and make the fire fall from
       heaven. For although, in the matter of taking various shapes, corporeal nature is not at the
       command of any Angel, either good or bad, but only at that of God the Creator, yet in the
       matter of local motion corporeal nature has to obey the spiritual nature. And this truth is
       clearly exemplified in man himself; for at the mere command of the will, which exists
       subjectively in the soul, the limbs are moved to perform that which they have been willed to
       do. Therefore whatever can be accomplished by mere local motion, this not only good but
       bad spirits can by their natural power accomplish, unless God should forbid it. But winds
       and rain and other similar disturbances of the air can be caused by the mere movement of
       vapours released from the earth or the water; therefore the natural power of devils is
       sufficient to cause such things. So says S. Thomas.
            For God in His justice using the devils as his agents of punishment inflicts the evils
       which come to us who live in this world. Therefore, with reference to that in the Psalms:
       “He called a famine on the land, and wasted all their substance of bread.”; the gloss says:
       God allowed this evil to be caused by the bad Angels who are in charge of such matters; and
       by famine is meant the Angel in charge of famine.
            We refer the reader also to what has been written above on the question as to whether
       witches must always have the devil's help to aid them in their works, and concerning the
       three kinds of harm which the devils at times inflict without the agency of a witch. But the
       devils are more eager to injure men with the help of a witch, since in this way God is the
       more offended, and greater power is given to them to torment and punish.
            And relevant to this subject is what the Doctors have written in the Second book of
       Sentences, dist. 6, on the question whether there is a special place assigned to the bad
       Angels in the clouds of the air. For in devils there are three things to be considered - their

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a15a.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:35 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter XV

       nature, their duty and their sin; and by nature they belong to the empyrean of heaven,
       through sin to the lower hell, but by reason of the duty assigned to them, as we have said, as
       ministers of punishment to the wicked and trial to the good, their place is in the clouds of the
       air. For they do not dwell here with us on the earth lest they should plague us too much; but
       in the air and around the fiery sphere they can so bring together the active and passive
       agents that, when God permits, they can bring down fire and lightning from heaven.
             A story is told in the Formicarius of a certain man who had been taken, and was asked
       by the judge how they went about to raise up hailstorms and tempests, and whether it was
       easy for them to do so. He answered: We can easily cause hailstorms, but we cannot do all
       the harm that we wish, because of the guardianship of good Angels. And he added: We can
       only injure those who are deprived of God's help; but we cannot hurt those who make the
       sign of the Cross. And this is how we got to work: first we use certain words in the fields to
       implore the chief of the devils to send one of his servants to strike the man whom we name.
       Then, when the devil has come, we sacrifice to him a black cock at two cross-roads,
       throwing it up into the air; and when the devil has received this, he performs our wish and
       stirs up the air, but not always in the places which we have named, and, according to the
       permission of the living God, sends down hailstorms and lightnings.
             In the same work we hear of a certain leader or heresiarch of witches named Staufer,
       who lived in Berne and the adjacent country, and used publicly to boast that, whenever he
       liked, he could change himself into a mouse in the sight of his rivals and slip through the
       hands of his deadly enemies; and that he had often escaped from the hands of his mortal foes
       in this manner. But when the Divine justice wished to put an end to his wickedness, some of
       his enemies lay in wait for him cautiously and saw him sitting in a basket near a window,
       and suddenly pierced him through with swords and spears, so that he miserably died for his
       crimes. Yet he left behind him a disciple, named Hoppo, who had also for his master that
       Stadlin whom we have mentioned before in the sixth chapter.
             These two could, whenever they pleased, cause the third part of the manure or straw or
       corn to pass invisibly from a neighbour's field to their own; they could raise the most violent
       hailstorms and destructive winds and lightning; could cast into the water in the sight of their
       parents children walking by the water-side, when there was no one else in sight; could cause
       barrenness in men and animals; could reveal hidden things to others; could in many ways
       injure men in their affairs or their bodies; could at times kill whom they would by lightning;
       and could cause many other plagues, when and where the justice of God permitted such
       things to be done.
             It is better to add an instance which came within our own experience. For in the diocese
       of Constance, twenty-eight German miles from the town of Ratisbon in the direction of
       Salzburg, a violent hailstorm destroyed all the fruit, crops and vineyards in a belt one mile
       wide, so that the vines hardly bore fruit for three years. This was brought to the notice of the
       Inquisition, since the people clamoured for an inquiry to be held; many beside all the
       townsmen being of the opinion that it was caused by witchcraft. Accordingly it was agreed
       after fifteen days' formal deliberation that it was a case of witchcraft for us to consider; and
       among a large number of suspects, we particularly examined two women, one named
       Agnes, a bath-woman, and the other Anna von Mindelheim. These two were taken and shut
       up separately in different prisons, neither of them knowing in the least what had happened to
       the other. On the following day the bath-woman was very gently questioned in the presence


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a15a.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:35 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter XV

       of a notary by the chief magistrate, a justice named Gelre very zealous for the Faith, and by
       the other magistrates with him; and although she was undoubtedly well provided with that
       evil gift of silence which is the constant bane of judges, and at the first trial affirmed that she
       was innocent of any crime against man or woman; yet, in the Divine mercy that so great a
       crime should not pass unpunished, suddenly, when she had been freed from her chains,
       although it was in the torture chamber, she fully laid bare all the crimes which she had
       committed. For when she was questioned by the Notary of the Inquisition upon the
       accusations which had been brought against her of harm done to men and cattle, by reason
       of which she had been gravely suspected of being a witch, although there had been no
       witness to prove that she had abjured the Faith or performed coitus with an Incubus devil
       (for she had been most secret); nevertheless, after she had confessed to the harm which she
       had caused to animals and men, she acknowledged also all that she was asked concerning
       the abjuration of the Faith, and copulation committed with an Incubus devil; saying that for
       more than eighteen years she had given her body to an Incubus devil, with a complete
       abnegation of the Faith.
              After this she was asked whether she knew anything about the hailstorm which we
       have mentioned, and answered that she did. And, being asked how and in what way, she
       answered: “I was in my house, and at midday a familiar came to me and told me to go with a
       little water on to the field or plain of Kuppel (for so is it named). And when I asked what he
       wanted to do with the water, he said that he wanted to make it rain. So I went out at the town
       gate, and found the devil standing under a tree.” The judge asked her, under which tree; and
       she said, “Under that one opposite that tower,” pointing it out. Asked what she did under the
       tree, she said, “The devil told me to dig a hole and pour the water into it.” Asked whether
       they say down together, she said, “I sat down, but the devil stood up.” Then she was, with
       what words and in what manner she had stirred the water; and she answered, “I stirred it
       with my finger, and called on the name of the devil himself and all the other devils.” Again
       the judge asked what was done with the water, and she answered: “It disappeared, and the
       devil took it up into the air.” Then she was asked if she had any associate, and answered:
       “Under another tree opposite I had a companion (naming the other capture witch, Anna von
       Mindelheim), but I do not know what she did.” Finally, the bath-woman was asked how
       long it was between the taking up of the water the hailstorm; and she answered: “There was
       just sufficient interval of time to allow me to get back to my house.”
              But (and this is remarkable) when on the next day the other witch had at first been
       exposed to the very gentlest questions, being suspended hardly clear of the ground by her
       thumbs, after she had been set quite free, she disclosed the whole matter without the
       slightest discrepancy from what the other had told; agreeing as to the place, that it was under
       such a tree and the other had been under another; as to the method, namely, of stirring water
       poured into a hole in the name of the devil and all the devils; and as to the interval of time,
       that the hailstorm had come after her devil had taken the water up into the air and she had
       returned home. Accordingly, on the third day they were burned. And the bath-woman was
       contrite and confessed, and commended herself to God, saying that she would die with a
       willing heart if she could escape the tortures of the devil, and held in her hand a cross which
       she kissed. But the other witch scorned her for doing so. And this one had consorted with an
       Incubus devil for more than twenty years with a complete abjuration of the Faith, and had
       done far more harm than the former witch to men, cattle and the fruits of the earth, as is
       shown in the preserved record of their trial.

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a15a.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:35 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter XV

             These instances must serve, since indeed countless examples of this sort of mischief
       could be recounted. But very often men and beasts and storehouses are struck by lightning
       by the power of devils; and the cause of this seems to be more hidden and ambiguous, since
       it often appears to happen by Divine permission without the co-operation of any witch.
       However, it has been found that witches have freely confessed that they have done such
       things, and there are various instances of it, which could be mentioned, in addition to what
       has already been said. Therefore it is reasonable to conclude that, just as easily as they raise
       hailstorms, so can they cause lightning and storms at sea; and so no doubt at all remains on
       these points.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                  Question I, Chapter XVI

                                                      Main Index


                                      This chapter was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a15a.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:35 PM]
Notes

           “Formicarius,” Chap. iii.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2040.html [2002-01-20 12:03:36 PM]
Notes

           “Cross-Roads.” In the trial of Dame Alice Kyteler of Kilkenny, 1324, it was shown that she had
        sacrificed at the cross-roads live animals (Holinshed says nine red cocks) to her familiar, Robert
        Artisson, “qui se facit appellari Artis Filium.” In Greek tradition the            , a poltergeist,
        haunted the cross-ways. Lemoine, VI, p. 109, tells us: “Celui qui veut devenir sorcier doit aller à
        un ‘quatre chemins’ avec une ‘poule noire,’ ou bien encore au ‘cimetière,’ sur une ‘tombe’ et
        toujours à ‘minuit.’ Il vient alors quelqu’un qui demande: ‘Qui venez-vous faire ici?’ ‘J’ai une
        poule à vendre,’ répond-on. Ce quelqu’un (est) le Méchant.”




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2041.html [2002-01-20 12:03:36 PM]
Notes

           “Staufer.” Staufus. “Formicarius,” Chap. iii. The edition Frankfort, 1588, Vol. I, p. 722, reads
        “Scavius” and in the margin “Schasius.” (Marginal note: “De Schasio in murem se
        conuertente.”)




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2042.html [2002-01-20 12:03:36 PM]
 Part II, Question I, Chapter XVI


                                  THE
                          MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                        PART II, QUESTION I.
                                                          CHAPTER XVI
Of Three Ways in which Mean and Women may be Discovered to be Addicted to Witchcraft: Divided into
                        Three Heads: and First of the Witchcraft of Archers.

              For our present purpose the last class of witchcraft is that which is practised in three
        forms by men; and first we must consider the seven deadly and horrible crimes which are
        committed by wizards who are archers. For first, on the Sacred Day of the Passion of Our
        Lord, that is to say, on Good Friday, as it is called, during the solemnization of the Mass of
        the Presanctified they shoot with arrows, as at a target, at the most sacred image of the
        Crucifix. Oh, the cruelty and injury to the Saviour! Secondly, though there is some doubt
        whether they have to utter a verbal form of apostasy to the devil in addition to that apostasy
        of deed, yet whether it be so or not, no greater injury to the Faith can be done by a Christian.
        For it is certain that, if such things were done by an infidel, they would be of no efficacy; for
        no such easy method of gratifying their hostility to the Faith is granted to them. Therefore
        these wretches ought to consider the truth and power of the Catholic Faith, for the
        confirmation of which God justly permits such crimes.
              Thirdly, such an archer has to shoot three or four arrows in this way, and as a
        consequence he is able to kill on any day just the same number of men. Fourthly, they have
        the following assurance from the devil; that though they must first actually set eyes on the
        man they wish to kill, and must bend their whole will on killing him, yet it matter not where
        the man may shut himself up, for he cannot be protected, but the arrows which have been
        shot will be carried and struck into him by the devil.
              Fifthly, they can shoot an arrow with such precision as to shoot a penny from a person's
        head without hurting his head, and they can continue to do this indefinitely. Sixthly, in order
        to gain this power they have to offer homage of body and soul to the devil. We shall give
        some instances of this sort of practice.
              For a certain prince of the Rhineland, named Eberhard Longbeard because he let his
        beard grow, had, before he was sixty years old, acquired for himself some of the Imperial
        territory, and was besieging a certain castle named Lendenbrunnen because of the raids
        which were made by the men of the castle. And he had in his company a wizard of this sort,
        named Puncker, who so molested the men of the castle that he killed them all in succession
        with his arrows, except one. And this is how he proceeded. Whenever he had looked at a
        man, it did not matter where that man went to or hid himself, he had only to loose an arrow
        and that man was mortally wounded and killed; and he was able to shoot three such arrows
        every day because he had shot three arrows at the image of the Saviour. It is probable that
        the devil favours the number three more than any other, because it represents an effective
        denial of the Holy Trinity. But after he had shot those three arrows, he could only shoot with
        the same uncertainty as other men. At last one of the men of the castle called out to him

 file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a16a.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:37 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter XVI

       mockingly, “Puncker, will you not at least spare the ring which hangs in the gate?” And he
       answered from outside in the night, “No; I shall take it away on the day that the castle is
       captured.” And he fulfilled his promise: for when, as has been said, all were killed except
       one, and the castle had been taken, he took that ring and hung it in his own house at Rorbach
       in the diocese of Worms, where it can be seen hanging to this day. But afterwards he was
       one night killed with their spades by some peasants whom he had injured, and he perished in
       his sins.
             It is told also of this man, that a very eminent person wished to have proof of his skill,
       and for a test placed his little son before the target with a penny on his cap, and ordered him
       to shoot the penny away without removing the cap. The wizard said that he would do it, but
       with reluctance, not being sure whether the devil was seducing him to his death. But,
       yielding to the persuasions of the prince, he placed one arrow in readiness in the cord which
       was slung over his should, fitted another to his bow, and shot the penny from the cap
       without hurting the boy. Seeing this, the prince asked him why he had placed the arrow in
       that cord; and he answered: “If I had been deceived by the devil and had killed my son,
       since I should have had to die I would quickly have shot you with the other arrow to avenge
       my death.”
             And though such wickedness is permitted by God for the proving and chastisement of
       the faithful, nevertheless more powerful miracles are performed by the Saviour's mercy for
       the strengthening and glory of the Faith.
             For in the diocese of Constance, near the castle of Hohenzorn and a convent of nuns,
       there is a newly-built church where may be seen an image of Our Saviour pierced with an
       arrow and bleeding. And the truth of this miracle is shown as follows. A miserable wretch
       who wished to be assured by the devil of having three or four arrows with which he could,
       in the manner we have told, kill whom he pleased, shot and pierced with an arrow (just as it
       is still seen) a certain Crucifix at a crossroad; and when it miraculously began to bleed, the
       wretch was stuck motionless in his steps by Divine power. And when he was asked by a
       passer-by why he stood fixed there, he shook his head, and trembling in his arms and his
       hands, in which he held the bow, and all over his body, could answer nothing. So the other
       looked about him, and saw the Crucifix with the arrow and the blood, and said: “You villain,
       you have pierced the image of Our Lord!” And calling some others, he told them to see that
       he did not escape (although, as has been said, he could not move), and ran to the castle and
       told what had happened. And they came down and found the wretched man in the same
       place; and when they had questioned him, and he had confessed his crime, he was removed
       from that district by public justice, and suffered a miserable death in merited expiation of his
       deeds.
             But, alas! how horrible it is to think that human perversity is not afraid to countenance
       such crimes. For it is said that in the halls of the great such men are maintained to glory in
       their crimes in open contempt of the Faith, to the heavy offence of the Divine Majesty, and
       in scorn of Our Redeemer; and are permitted to boast of their deeds.
             Wherefore such protectors, defenders and patrons are to be judged not only heretics,
       but even apostates from the Faith, and are to be punished in the manner that will be told.
       And this is the seventh deadly sin of these wizards. For first they are by very law
       excommunicated; and if the patrons are clerics they are degraded and deprived of all office
       and benefit, nor can they be restored except by a special indulgence from the Apostolic See.


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a16a.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:37 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter XVI

       Also, if after their proscription such protectors remain obstinate in their excommunication
       for the period of a year, they are to be condemned as heretics.
             This is in accordance with the Canon Law; for, in Book VI, it touches on the question
       of direct or indirect interference with the proceedings of Diocesans and Inquisitors in the
       cause of the Faith, and mentions the aforesaid punishment to be inflicted after a year. For it
       say: We forbid any interference from Potentates, temporal Lords and Rulers, and their
       Officials, etc. Anyone may refer to the chapter.
             And further, that witches and their protectors are by very law to be excommunicated is
       shown in the Canon of the suppressing of the heresy of witchcraft; especially where it says:
       We excommunicate and anathematize all heretics, Catharists, Sectaries . . . and others, by
       whatever names they are known, etc. And with these it includes all their sympathizers and
       protectors, and others; saying later on: Also we excommunicate all followers, protectors,
       defenders and patrons of such heretics.
             The Canon Law prescribes various penalties which are incurred within the space of a
       year by such heretics, whether laymen or clerics, where it says: We place under the ban of
       excommunication all their protectors, patrons and defenders, so that when any such has been
       so sentenced and has scorned to recant his heresy, within a year from that time he shall be
       considered an outlaw, and shall not be admitted to any office or council, nor be able to vote
       in the election of such officers, nor be allowed free opportunity of giving evidence; he shall
       not succeed to any inheritance, and no one shall be held responsible for any business
       transaction with him. If he be a judge, his judgement shall not stand, nor shall any case be
       brought to his hearing. If he be an advocate, he shall not be allowed to plead. If he be a
       notary, no instrument drawn up by him shall have any weight, but is to be condemned
       together with its condemned author; and similar penalties are decreed for the holders of
       other offices. But if he be a cleric, he is to be degraded from all office and benefice; for, his
       guilt being the greater, it is more heavily avenged. And if any such, after they have been
       marked down by the Church, contemptuously try to ignore their punishment, the sentence of
       excommunication is to be rigorously applied to them to the extreme limits of vengeance.
       And the clergy shall not administer the Sacraments of the Church to such heretics, nor
       presume to give them Christian burial, nor accept their alms and oblations, on pain of being
       deprived of their office, to which they can in no way be restored without a special
       indulgence from the Apostolic See.
             There are, finally, many other penalties incurred by such heretics even when they do
       not persist in their obstinacy for a year, and also by their children and grandchildren: for
       they can be degraded by a Bishop or by an Inquisitor, declared deprived of all titles,
       possessions, honours and ecclesiastical benefits, in fine of all public offices whatsoever. But
       this is only when they are persistently and obstinately impenitent. Also their sons to the
       second generation may be disqualified and unable to obtain either ecclesiastical preferment
       or public office; but this is to be understood only of the descendants on the father's side, and
       not on the mother's, and only of those who are impenitent. Also all their followers,
       protectors, fautors and patrons shall be denied all right of petition or appeal; and this is
       explained as meaning that, after a verdict has been returned that they are such heretics, then
       can they make no appeal before their sentence, however much they may have been in any
       respect ill-used or treated with undue severity. Much more could be adduced in support of
       our standpoint, but this is sufficient.
             Now for the better understanding of what has been said, some few points are to be

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a16a.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:37 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter XVI

       discussed. And first, if a prince or secular potentate employ such a wizard as we have
       described for the destruction of some castle in a just war, and with his help crushes the
       tyranny of wicked men; is his whole army to be considered as protectors and patrons of that
       wizard, and to be subjected to the penalties we have mentioned? The answer seems to be
       that the rigour of justice must be tempered on account of their numbers. For the leader, with
       his counsellors and advisers, must be considered to have aided and abetted such witchcraft,
       and they are by law implicated in the aforesaid penalties when, after being warned by their
       spiritual advisers, they have persisted in their bad course; and then they are to be judged
       protectors and patrons, and are to be punished. But the rest of the army, since they have no
       part in their leaders' council, but are simply prepared to risk their lives in defence of their
       country, although they may view with approval the feats of the wizard, nevertheless escape
       the sentence of excommunication; but they must in their confession acknowledge the guilt
       of the wizard, and in their absolution by the confessor must receive a solemn warning to
       hold all such practices for ever in detestation, and as far as they are able drive from their
       land all such wizards.
             It may be asked by whom such princes are to be absolved when they come to their
       senses, whether by their own spiritual advisers or by the Inquisitors? We answer that, if they
       repent, they may be absolved either by their spiritual advisers, or by the Inquisitors. This is
       provided in the Canon Law concerning the proceedings to be taken, in the fear of God and
       as a warning to men, against heretics, their followers, protectors, patrons and fautors, as also
       against those who are accused or suspected of heresy. But if any of the above, forswearing
       his former lapse into heresy, wish to return to the unity of the Church, he may receive the
       benefit of absolution provided by Holy Church.
             A prince, or any other, may be said to have returned to his senses when he has
       delivered up the wizard to be punished for his offences against the Creator; when he has
       banished from his dominions all who have been found guilty of witchcraft or heresy; when
       he is truly penitent for the past; and when, as becomes a Catholic prince, he is firmly
       determined in his mind not to show any favour to any other such wizard.
                                                                 Page 1 of 2


                                    Question I, Chapter XVI continued . . . .

                                                      Main Index


                                                 Part II, Question I, Chapter XVI
                                               was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a16a.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:37 PM]
Notes

           “Shoot an Arrow.” This old tradition was made the subject of the celebrated opera “Der
        Freischutz,” the libretto of which is by Kind, the music by Weber. It was originally
        produced at Berlin in 1821, and on 22 July, 1824, first performed in England at the Lyceum
        Theatre, London, as “Der Freischutz; or, The Seventh Bullet.”




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2043.html [2002-01-20 12:03:37 PM]
Notes

            “Began to Bleed.” On 29 May, 1187, a number of mercenaries and bandits were playing
        with dice before the door of the church at Déols. One of these fellows, who had lost a throw,
        cursing and swearing, took up a stone, which he flung at the figure of Our Lady with the
        Child over the sacred portal. The arm of the Infant JESUS was snapped in twain. “ A stream
        of blood poured from the arm of the broken image and made a pool on the earth below. The
        wretch who flung the stone was seized with madness, and dropped down dead upon the
        spot.” The blood was carefully collected in a phial which was deposited in an Oratory
        dedicated to Our Lady. Numberless cures were effected, and a Confraternity which was
        founded in honour of the miracle flourished until the Revolution. It was reorganized in
        1830, and on 31 May there is a solemn Commemoration of the Blood-shedding of Notre
        Dame de Déols.
            After S. Paul of the Cross (1694-1775) had preached for the last time in the church of
        Piagaro, a Crucifix over one of the side-altars was seen to be oozing with blood. Hundreds
        witnessed the miracle, and later a chapel was built to enshrine the Miraculous Cross. In
        1630 at Spoleto, drops of blood flowed from the head of a figure of Our Lord Crowned with
        Thorns. Even in this unbelieving age the Most Holy Crucifix of Limpias, El Santo Cristo de
        la Agonia, sweats blood, whilst tears have been observed in the eyes, which turn from side
        to side, and the head sometimes moves as in all the weariness of bitter pain. Very many
        other instances of similar miracles mighy be cited.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2044.html [2002-01-20 12:03:37 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter XVI


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                    PART II, QUESTION I.
                                                  CHAPTER XVI CONTINUED

             But it may be asked to whom should such a man be surrendered, in what court he
       should be tried, and whether he is to be judged as one openly apprehended in heresy? The
       first difficulty is specially dealt with at the beginning of the Third part; namely, whether it is
       the business of a secular or of an ecclesiastical judge to punish such men. It is manifestly
       stated in the Canon Law that no temporal magistrate or judge is competent to try a case of
       heresy without a licence from the Bishops and Inquisitors, or at least under the hand of
       someone who has authority from them. But when it says that the secular courts have no
       jurisdiction in this matter because the crime of heresy is exclusively ecclesiastical, this does
       not seem to apply to the case of witches; for the crimes of witches are not exclusively
       ecclesiastical, but are also civil on account of the temporal damage which they do.
       Nevertheless, as will be shown later, although the ecclesiastical judge must try and judge the
       case, yet it is for the secular judge to carry out the sentence and inflict punishment, as is
       shown in the chapters of the Canon no the abolition of heresy, and on excommunication.
       Wherefore, even if he does surrender the witch to the Ordinary to be judged, the secular
       judge has still the power of punishing him after he has been delivered back by the Bishop;
       and with the consent of the Bishop, the secular judge can even perform both offices, that is,
       he can both sentence and punish.
             And it is no valid objection to say that such wizards are rather apostates than heretics;
       for both these are offenders against the Faith; but whereas a heretic is only in some partial or
       total doubt with regard to the Faith, witchcraft in its very essence implies apostasy intent
       from the Faith. For it is a heavier sin to corrupt the Faith, which is the life of the soul, than
       to falsify money, which is a prop to the life of the body. And if counterfeiters of money, and
       other malefactors, are immediately sentenced to death, how much more just and equitable it
       is that such heretics and apostates should be immediately put to death when they are
       convicted.
             Here was have also answered the second difficulty, namely, by what court and judge
       such men are to be punished. But this will be more fully considered in the Third Part of this
       work, where we treat of the methods of sentencing the offenders, and how one taken in open
       heresy is to be sentenced (see the eighth and twelfth methods), and of the question whether
       one who becomes penitent is still to be put to death.
             For if a simple heretic constantly backslides as often as he repents, he is to be put to
       death according to the Canon Law; and this is reasonable according to S. Thomas, as being
       for the general good. For if relapsed heretics are often and often received back and allowed
       to live and keep their temporal goods, it might prejudice the salvation of others, both
       because they might infect others if they fell again, and because, if they were to escape
       without punishment, others would have less fear in being infected with heresy. And their


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a16b.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:38 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter XVI

       very relapse argues that they are not constant in the Faith, and they are therefore justly to be
       put to death. And so we ought to say here that, if a mere suspicion of inconstancy is
       sufficient warrant for an ecclesiastical judge to hand over such a backslider to the secular
       court to be put to death, much more must he do so in the case of one who refuses to prove
       his penitence and change of heart by handing over to the secular court an apostate or any
       witch, but rather leaves free and unchecked one whom the secular judge wishes to put to
       death as a witch according to the law, on account of the temporal injuries of which he has
       been guilty. But if the witch is penitent, the ecclesiastical judge must first absolve him from
       the excommunication which he has incurred because of the heresy of witchcraft. Also when
       a heretic is penitent, he can be received back into the bosom of the Church for the salvation
       of his soul. This matter is further discussed in the First Question of the Third Part, and this is
       ample for the present. Only let all Rulers consider how strictly and minutely they will be
       called to account by that terrible Judge; for indeed there will be a severe judgement on those
       in authority who allow such wizards to live and work their injuries against the Creator.
             The other two classes of wizards belong to the general category of those who can use
       incantations and sacrilegious charms so as to render certain weapons incapable of harming
       or wounding them; and these are divided into two kinds. For the first class resemble the
       archer-wizards of whom we have just spoken, in that they also mutilate the image of Christ
       crucified. For example, if they wish their head to be immune from any wound from a
       weapon or from any blow, they take off the head of the Crucifix; if they wish their neck to
       be invulnerable, they take off its neck; if their arm, they take off, or at least shorten, the arm,
       and so on. And sometimes they take away all above the waist, or below it. And in proof of
       this, hardly one in ten of the Crucifixes set up at cross-roads or in the fields can be found
       whole and intact. And some carry the limbs thus broken off about with them, and others
       procure their invulnerability by means of sacred or unknown words: therefore there is this
       difference between them. The first sort resemble the archer-wizards in their contempt of the
       Faith and their mutilation of the image of the Saviour, and are therefore to be considered as
       true apostates, and so much be judged when they do not approach them in wickedness. For
       they seem only to act for the protection of their own bodies, either above the waist or below
       it, or of the whole body. Therefore they are not to be judged as penitent heretics and not
       relapsed, when they have been convicted as wizards and have repented; and they are to be
       imposed a penance according to the eighth manner, with solemn adjuration and
       incarceration, as is shown in the Third Part of this work.
             The second sort can magically enchant weapons so that they can walk on them with
       bare feet, and similar strange feats do they perform (for according to S. Isidore, Etym. VIII,
       enchanters are those who have some skill to perform wonders by means of words). And
       there is a distinction to be made between them; for some perform their incantations by
       means of sacred words, or charms written up over the sick, and these are lawful provided
       that seven conditions are observed, as will be shown later where we deal with the methods
       of curing those who are bewitched. But incantations made over weapons by certain secret
       words, or cases where the charms written for the sick have been taken down, are matters for
       the judge's attention. For when they use words of which they do not themselves know the
       meaning, or characters and signs which are not the sign of the Cross, such practices are
       altogether to be repudiated, and good men should beware of the cruel arts of these warlocks.
       And if they will not desist from such deeds, they must be judges as suspects although
       lightly, and the manner of sentencing such after the second method will be shown later. For

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a16b.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:38 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter XVI

       they are not untainted with the sin of heresy; for deeds of this kind can only be done with the
       help of the devil, and, as we have shown, he who uses such help is judged to be an apostate
       from the Faith. Yet on the plea of ignorance or of mending their ways they may be dealt
       with more leniently than the archer-wizards.
             It is more commonly found that traders and merchants are in the habit of carrying about
       them such charms and runes; and since they partake of the nature of incantations, a complete
       riddance must be made of them, either by the father confessor in the box, or in open court by
       the ecclesiastical judge. For these unknown words and characters imply a tacit compact with
       the devil, who secretly uses such things for his own purpose, granting their wearers their
       wishes, that he may lure them on to worse things. Therefore in the court of law such men
       must be warned and sentenced after the second method. In the box, the confessor must
       examine the charm, and if he is unwilling to throw it away altogether, he must delete the
       unknown words and signs, but may keep any Gospel words or the sign of the Cross.
             Now with regard to all these classes of wizards, and especially the archers, it must be
       noted, as has been declared above, whether they are to be judged as heretics openly taken in
       that sin; and we have touched on this matter even before in the First Question of the First
       Part. And there it is shown that S. Bernard says that there are three ways by which a man
       can be convicted of heresy: either by the evidence of the fact when in simply heresy he
       publicly preaches his errors, or by the credible evidence of witnesses, or by a man's own
       confession. S. Bernard also explains the meaning of some of the words of the Canon Law in
       this connexion, as was shown in the First Question of the First Part of this work.
             It is clear, therefore, that archer-wizards, and those mages who enchant other weapons,
       are to be considered as manifestly guilty of flagrant heresy, through some expressed pact
       with the devil, since it is obvious that their feats would not be possible without the devil's
       help.
             Secondly, it is equally clear that the patrons, protectors and defenders of such men are
       manifestly to be judged in the same way, and subjected to the prescribed punishments. For
       there is not in their case, as there may be in that of several others, any doubt as to whether
       they are to be regarded as lightly or strongly or gravely suspected; but they are always very
       grave sinners against the Faith, and are always visited by God with a miserable death.
             For it is told that a certain prince used to keep such wizards in his favour, and by their
       help unduly oppressed a certain city in matters of commerce. And when one of his retainers
       remonstrated with him over this, he threw away all fear of God and exclaimed, “God grant
       that I may die in this place if I am oppressing them unjustly.” Divine vengeance quickly
       followed these words, and he was stricken down with sudden death. And this vengeance was
       not so much on account of his unjust oppression as because of his patronage of heresy.
             Thirdly, it is clear that all Bishops and Rulers who do not essay their utmost to suppress
       crimes of this sort, with their authors and patrons, are themselves to be judged as evident
       abettors of the crime, and are manifestly to be punished in the prescribed manner.
                                                                 Page 2 of 2




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a16b.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:38 PM]
Part II, Question I, Chapter XVI

                                                              Question II

                                                      Main Index


                                                 Part II, Question I, Chapter XVI
                                               was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02a16b.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:38 PM]
Part II, Question II - P.1


                                     THE
                             MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                      PART II, QUESTION II.
                                    The Methods of Destroying and Curing Witchcraft.
                             Introduction, wherein is Set Forth the Difficulty of this Question.

             Is it lawful to remove witchcraft by means of further witchcraft, or by any other
       forbidden means?
             It is argued that it is not; for it has already been shown that in the Second Book of
       Sentences, and the 8th Distinction, all the Doctors agree that it is unlawful to use the help of
       devils, since to do so involves apostasy from the Faith. And, it is argued, no witchcraft can
       be removed without the help of devils. For it is submitted that it must be cured either by
       human power, or by diabolic, or by Divine power. It cannot be by the first; for the lower
       power cannot counteract the higher, having no control over that which is outside its own
       natural capacity. Neither can it be by Divine power; for this would be a miracle, which God
       performs only at His own will, and not at the instance of men. For when His Mother
       besought Christ to perform a miracle to supply the need for wine, He answered: Woman,
       what have I to do with thee? And the Doctors explain this as meaning, “What association is
       there between you and me in the working of a miracle?” Also it appears that it is very rarely
       that men are delivered from a bewitchment by calling on God's help or the prayers of the
       Saints. Therefore it follows that they can only be delivered by the help of devils; and it is
       unlawful to seek such help.
             Again it is pointed out that the common method in practice of taking off a
       bewitchment, although it is quite unlawful, is for the bewitched persons to resort to wise
       women, by whom they are very frequently cured, and not by priests or exorcists. So
       experience shows that such curses are effected by the help of devils, which it is unlawful to
       seek; therefore it cannot be lawful thus to cure a bewitchment, but it must patiently be
       borne.
             It is further argued that S. Thomas and S. Bonaventura, in Book IV, dist. 34, have said
       that a bewitchment must be permanent because it can have no human remedy; for if there is
       a remedy, it is either unknown to men or unlawful. And these words are taken to mean that
       this infirmity is incurable and must be regarded as permanent; and they add that, even if God
       should provide a remedy by coercing the devil, and the devil should remove his plague from
       a man, and the man should be cured, that cure would not be a human one. Therefore, unless
       God should cure it, it is not lawful for a man to himself to try in any way to look for a cure.
             In the same place these two Doctors add that it is unlawful even to seek a remedy by
       the superadding of another bewitchment. For they say that, granting this to be possible, and
       that the original spell be removed, yet the witchcraft is none the less to be considered
       permanent; for it is in no way lawful to invoke the devil's help through witchcraft.
             Further, it is submitted that the exorcisms of the Church are not always effective in the


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b00a.html (1 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:39 PM]
Part II, Question II - P.1

       repression of devils in the matter of bodily afflictions, since such are cured only at the
       discretion of God; but they are effective always against those molestations of devils against
       which they are chiefly instituted, as, for example, against men who are possessed, or in the
       matter of exorcising children.
             Again, it does not follow that, because the devil has been given power over someone on
       account of his sins, that power must come to an end on the cessation of the sin. For very
       often a man may cease from sinning, but his sins still remain. So it seems from these sayings
       that the two Doctors we have cited were of the opinion that it is unlawful to remove a
       bewitchment, but that it must be suffered, just as it is permitted by the Lord God, Who can
       remove it when it seems good to Him.
             Against this opinion it is argued that just as God and Nature do not abound in
       superfluities, so also they are not deficient in necessities; and it is a necessity that there
       should be given to the faithful against such devils' work not only a means of protection (of
       which we treat in the beginning of this Second Part), but also curative remedies. For
       otherwise the faithful would not be sufficiently provided for by God, and the works of the
       devil would seem to be stronger than God's work.
             Also there is the gloss on that text in Job. There is no power on earth, etc. The gloss
       says that, although the devil has power over all things human, he is nevertheless subject to
       the merits of the Saints, and even to the merits of saintly men in this life.
             Again, S. Augustine (De moribus Ecclesiae) says: No Angel is more powerful than our
       mind, when we hold fast to God. For if power is a virtue in this world, then the mind that
       keeps close to God is more sublime than the whole world. Therefore such minds can undo
       the works of the devil.
             Answer. Here are two weighty opinions which, it seems, are at complete variance with
       each other.
             For there are certain Theologians and Canonists who agree that it is lawful to remove
       witchcraft even by superstitious and vain means. And of this opinion are Duns Scotus,
       Henry of Segusio, and Godfrey, and all the Canonists. But it is the opinion of the other
       Theologians, especially the ancient ones, and of some of the modern ones, such as S.
       Thomas, S. Bonaventura, Blessed Albert, Peter a Palude, and many others, that in no case
       must evil be done that good may result, and that a man ought rather to die than consent to be
       cured by superstitious and vain means.
             Let us now examine their opinions, with a view to bringing them as far as possible into
       agreement. Scotus, in his Fourth Book, dist. 34, on obstructions and impotence caused by
       witchcraft, says that it is foolish to maintain that it is unlawful to remove a bewitchment
       even by superstitious and vain means, and that to do so is in no way contrary to the Faith;
       for he who destroys the work of the devil is not an accessory to such works, but believes that
       the devil has the power and inclination to help in the infliction of an injury only so long as
       the outward token or sign of that injury endures. Therefore when that token is destroyed he
       puts an end to the injury. And he adds that it is meritorious to destroy the works of the devil.
       But, as he speaks of tokens, we will give an example.
             There are women who discover a witch by the following token. When a cow's supply
       of milk has been diminished by witchcraft, they hang a pail of milk over the fire, and
       uttering certain superstitious words, beat the pail with a stick. And though it is the pail that
       the women beat, yet the devil carries all those blows to the back of the witch; and in this


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b00a.html (2 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:39 PM]
Part II, Question II - P.1

       way both the witch and the devil are made weary. But the devil does this in order that he
       may lead on the woman who beats the pail to worse practices. And so, if it were not for the
       risk which it entails, there would be no difficulty in accepting the opinion of this learned
       Doctor. Many other examples could be given.
             Henry of Segusio, in his eloquent Summa on genital impotence caused by witchcraft,
       says that in such cases recourse must be had to the remedies of physicians; and although
       some of these remedies seem to be vain and superstitious cantrips and charms, yet everyone
       must be trusted in his own profession, and the Church may well tolerate the suppression of
       vanities by means of others vanities.
             Ubertinus also, in his Fourth Book, uses these words: A bewitchment can be removed
       either by prayer or by the same art by which it was inflicted.
             Godfrey says in his Summa: A bewitchment cannot always be removed by him who
       caused it, either because he is dead, or because he does not know how to cure it, or because
       the necessary charm is lost. But if he knows how to effect relief, it is lawful for him to cure
       it. Our author is speaking against those who said that an obstruction of the carnal act could
       not be caused by witchcraft, and that it could never be permanent, and therefore did not
       annul a marriage already contracted.
             Besides, those who maintained that no spell is permanent were moved by the following
       reasons: they thought that every bewitchment could be removed either by another magic
       spell, or by the exorcisms of the Church which are ordained for the suppression of the
       devil's power, or by true penitence, since the devil has power only over sinners. So in the
       first respect they agree with the opinion of the others, namely, that a spell can be removed
       by superstitious means.
             But S. Thomas is of the contrary opinion when he says: If a spell cannot be revoked
       except by some unlawful means, such as the devil's help or anything of that sort, even if it is
       known that it can be revoked in that way, it is nevertheless to be considered permanent; for
       the remedy is not lawful.
             Of the same opinion are S. Bonaventura, Peter a Palude, Blessed Albert, and all the
       Theologians. For, touching briefly on the question of invoking the help of the devil either
       tacitly or expressedly, they seem to hold that such spells may only be removed by lawful
       exorcism or true penitence (as is set down in the Canon Law concerning sortilege), being
       moved, as it seems, by the considerations mentioned in the beginning of this Question.
             But it is expedient to bring these various opinions of the learned Doctors as far as
       possible into agreement, and this can be done in one respect. For this purpose it is to be
       noted that the methods by which a spell of witchcraft can be removed are as follows: - either
       by the agency of another witch and another spell; or without the agency of a witch, but by
       means of magic and unlawful ceremonies. And this last method may be divided into two;
       namely, the use of ceremonies which are both unlawful and vain, or the use of ceremonies
       which are vain but not unlawful.
             The first remedy is altogether unlawful, in respect both of the agent and of the remedy
       itself. But it may be accomplished in two ways; either with some injury to him who worked
       the spell, or without an injury, but with magic and unlawful ceremonies. In the latter case it
       can be included with the second method, namely, that by which the spell is removed not by
       the agency of a witch, but by magic and unlawful ceremonies; and in this case it is still to be
       judged unlawful, though not to the same extent as the first method.


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b00a.html (3 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:39 PM]
Part II, Question II - P.1

             We may summarize the position as follows. There are three conditions by which a
       remedy is rendered unlawful. First, when a spell is removed through the agency of another
       witch, and by further witchcraft, that is, by the power of some devil. Secondly, when it is
       not removed by a witch, but by some honest person, in such a way, however, that the spell is
       by some magical remedy transferred from one person to another; and this again is unlawful.
       Thirdly, when the spell is removed without imposing it on another person, but some open or
       tacit invocation of devils is used; and then again it is unlawful.
             And it is with reference to these methods that the Theologians say that it is better to die
       than to consent to them. But there are two other methods by which, according to the
       Canonists, it is lawful, or not idle and vain, to remove a spell; and that such methods may be
       used when all the remedies of the Church, such as exorcisms and the prayers of the Saints
       and true penitence, have been tried and have failed. But for a clearer understanding of these
       remedies we will recount some examples known to our experience.
             In the time of Pope Nicolas there had come to Rome on some business a certain Bishop
       from Germany, whom it is charitable not to name although he had now paid the debt of all
       nature. There he fell in love with a girl, and sent her to his diocese in charge of two servants
       and certain other of his possessions, including some rich jewels, which were indeed very
       valuable, and began to think in her heart that, if only the Bishop were to die through some
       witchcraft, she would be able to take possession of the rings, the pendants and carcanets.
       The next night the Bishop suddenly fell ill, and the physicians and his servants gravely
       suspected that he had been poisoned; for there was such a fire in his breast that he had to
       take continual draughts of cold water to assuage it. On the third day, when there seemed no
       hope of his life, an old woman came and begged that she might see him. So they let her in,
       and she promised the Bishop that she could heal him if he would agree to her proposals.
       When the Bishop asked what it was to which he had to agree in order to regain his health, as
       he so greatly desired, the old woman answered: Your illness has ben caused by a spell of
       witchcraft, and you can only be healed by another spell, which will transfer the illness from
       you to the witch who caused it, so that she will die. The Bishop was astounded; and seeing
       that he could be healed in no other way, and not wishing to come to a rash decision, decided
       to ask the advice of the Pope. Now the Holy Father loved him very dearly, and when he
       learned that he could only be healed by the death of the witch, he agreed to permit the lesser
       of two evils, and signed this permission with his seal. So the old woman was again
       approached and told that both he and the Pope had agreed to the death of the witch, on
       condition that he was restored to his former health; and the old woman went away,
       promising him that he would be healed on the following night. And behold! when about the
       middle of the night he felt himself cured and free from all illness, he sent a messenger to
       learn what had happened to the girl; and he came back and reported that she had suddenly
       been taken ill in the middle of the night while sleeping by her mother's side.
             It is to be understood that at the very same hour and moment the illness left the Bishop
       and afflicted the girl witch, through the agency of the old witch; and so the evil spirit, by
       ceasing to plague the Bishop, appeared to restore him to health by chance, whereas it was
       not he but God who permitted him to afflict im, and it was God Who properly speaking
       restored him; and the devil, by reason of his compact with the second witch, who envied the
       fortune of the girl, has to afflict the Bishop's mistress. And it must be thought that those two
       evil spells were not worked by one devil serving two persons, but by two devils serving two


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b00a.html (4 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:39 PM]
Part II, Question II - P.1

       separate witches. For the devils do not work against themselves, but work as much as
       possible in agreement for the perdition of souls.
                                                                 Page 1 of 3


                                                Question II Continued . . . .

                                                      Main Index


                                                        Part II, Question II
                                               was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                             HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                     All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b00a.html (5 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:39 PM]
Notes

           “Miracle.” The sense is completely mistaken here. It should rather be, “Lady, what is it
        to Me and to Thee” if these people lack wine? Our Lord marvels at the supreme charity of
        Our Lady. The first miracle was wrought at the request of MARY. Quod Deus imperio tu
        prece, Virgo, potes. It may be argued that all miracles are performed at the request of Our
        Lady, since, as S. Bernard says, God wishes us to obtain everything through Her. Totum
        now uoluit habere per MARIAM.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2045.html [2002-01-20 12:03:39 PM]
Notes

           “Devils.” If the exorcism is not effective it is owing to lack of faith.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2046.html [2002-01-20 12:03:39 PM]
Notes

           “De Moribus.” “De Moribus ecclesiae catholicae et de moribus Manichaeorum” was
        written 388-89.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2047.html [2002-01-20 12:03:39 PM]
Notes

           “Duns Scotus.” John Duns Scotus, Doctor Subtilis, the famous Franciscan scholastic,
        died 8 November, 1308. He lived and taught at Oxford, and for a time at Paris. His
        complete work with commentaries appeared at Paris, 1891-95, in twenty-six volumes,
        quarto, being a reprint of the twelve folio volumes which were issued by Luke Wadding in
        1639 at Lyons.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2048.html [2002-01-20 12:03:39 PM]
Notes

           “Ubertinus.” Ubertino of Casale, leader of the Spiritual Franciscans, who expressed
        extreme views regarding evangelical poverty. He was born in 1259, and died about 1330.
        Owing to his warm advocacy of the strictest ideas he was severely condemned by the
        authorities, and his history is a matter of considerable difficulty. His chief work is generally
        considered to be “Arbor uitae crucifixae JESU Christi.”




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2049.html [2002-01-20 12:03:40 PM]
Notes

           “Against themselves.” “S. Matthew” xii, 26: “Et si Satanas Satanam eiicit, aduersus se
        diuisus est: quomodo ergo regnum eius?”




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2050.html [2002-01-20 12:03:40 PM]
Part II, Question II - P.2


                                     THE
                             MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                           PART II, QUESTION II. CONTINUED

             Finally, the Bishop went out of compassion to visit the girl; but when he entered the
       room, she received him with horrible execrations, crying out: May you and she who
       wrought your cure be damned for ever! And the Bishop tried to soften her mind to
       penitence, and told her that he forgave her all her wrongs; but she turned her face away and
       said: I have no hope of pardon, but commend my soul to all the devils in hell; and died
       miserably. But the Bishop returned home with joy and thankfulness.
             Here it is to be noted that a privilege granted to one does not construe a precedent for
       all, and the dispensation of the Pope in this case does not argue that it is lawful in all cases.
             Nider in his Formicarius refers to the same master, for he says: The following method
       is sometimes employed for removing or taking vengeance for a spell of witchcraft. Someone
       who has been bewitched either in himself or in his possessions comes to a witch desiring to
       know how has injured him. Then the witch pours molten lead into water until, by the work
       of the devil, some image is formed by the solidified lead. On this, the witch asks his enemy
       to be hurt, so that he may recognize him by that hurt. And when he has chosen, the witch
       immediately pierces or wounds with a knife the leaden image in the same part, and shows
       him the place by which he can recognize the guilty person. And it is found by experience
       that, just in the same way as the leaden image is hurt, so is the witch hurt who cast the spell.
             But of this sort of remedy I say, and of others like it, that generally they are unlawful;
       although human weakness, in the hope of obtaining pardon from God, is very often ensnared
       in such practices, being more careful for the health of the body than for that of the soul.
             The second kind of cure which is wrought by witches who remove a spell again
       requires an expressed pact with the devil, but is not accompanied by any injury to another
       person. And in what light such witches should be considered, and how they are to be
       recognized, will be shown later in the fifteenth method of sentencing witches, for they are
       always found at intervals of one or two German miles, and these seem to be able to cure any
       who have been bewitched by another witch in their own district. Some of them claim to be
       able to effect such cures at all times; some that they can only cure those bewitched in the
       neighbouring signiory; others that they can only perform their cures with the consent of the
       witch who cast the original spell.
             And it is known that these women have entered into an open pact with the devil,
       because they reveal secret matters to those who come to them to be cured. For they suddenly
       disclose to such a person the cause of his calamity, telling him that he has been bewitched
       either in his own person or in his possessions because of some quarrel he has had with a
       neighbour or with some other woman or man; and at times, in order to keep their criminal
       practices secret, they enjoin upon their clients some pilgrimage or other pious work. But to
       approach such women in order to be cured is all the more pernicious because they seem to
       bring greater contempt upon the Faith than others who effect their cures by means of a


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b00b.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:41 PM]
Part II, Question II - P.2

       merely tacit compact with the devil.
             For they who resort to such witches are thinking more of their bodily health than of
       God, and besides that, God cuts short their lives to punish them for taking into their own
       hands the vengeance for their wrongs. For so the Divine vengeance overtook Saul, because
       he first cast out of the land all magicians and wizards, and afterwards consulted a witch;
       wherefore he was slain in battle with his sons, I. Samuel xxviii, and I. Paralipomenon x.
       And for the same reason the sick Ochozias had to die, IV. Kings i (Ahaziah; II. Kings i.
       A.V.).
             Also the who consult such witches are regarded as defamed, and cannot be allowed to
       bring an accusation, as will be shown in the Third Part; and they are by law to be sentenced
       to capital punishment, as was said in the First Question of this work.
             But alas! O Lord God, Who art just in all Thy judgements, who shall deliver the poor
       who are bewitched and cry out in their ceaseless pains? For our sins are so great, and the
       enemy is so strong; and where are they who can undo the works of the devil by lawful
       exorcisms? This one remedy appears to be left; that judges should, by various penalties,
       keep such wickedness as far as possible in check by punishing the witches who are the cause
       of it; that so they may deprive the sick of the opportunity of consulting witches. But, alas!
       no one understands this in his heart; but they all seek for their own gain instead of that of
       JESUS Christ.
             For so many people used to go to be freed from spells to that witch in Reichshofen,
       whom we have already mentioned, that the Count of the castle set up a toll-booth, and all
       who were bewitched in their own persons or in their possessions had to pay a penny before
       they could visit her house; and he boasted that he made a substantial profit by this means.
             We know from experience that there are many such witches in the diocese of
       Constance: not that this diocese is more infected than others, since this form of infidelity is
       general in all dioceses; but this diocese has been more thoroughly sifted. It was found that
       daily resort was being made to a man named Hengst by a very large concourse of poor folk
       who had been bewitched, and with our own eyes we saw such crowds in the village of
       Eningen, that certainly the poor never flocked to any shrine of the Blessed Virgin, or to a
       Holy Well or a Hermitage, in such numbers as they went to that sorcerer. For in the very
       coldest winter weather, when all the highways and byways were snow-bound, they came to
       him from two or three miles round in spite of the greatest difficulties; and some were cured,
       but others not. For I suppose that all spells are not equally easy to remove, on account of
       various obstacles, as has been said before. And these witches remove spells by means of an
       open invocation of devils after the manner of the second kind of remedies, which are
       unlawful, but not to the same extent as the first kind.
             The third kind of remedy is that which is wrought by means of certain superstitious
       ceremonies, but without any injury to anyone, and not by an overt witch. An example of this
       method is as follows:
             A certain market merchant in the town of Spires deposed that the following experience
       had happened to him. I was staying, he said, in Swabia in a well-known nobleman's castle,
       and one day after dinner I was strolling at my ease with two of the servants in the fields,
       when a woman met us. But while she was still a long way off my companions recognized
       her, and one of them said to me, “Cross yourself quickly,” and the other one urged me in
       like manner. I asked them what they feared, and they answered, “The most dangerous witch


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b00b.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:41 PM]
Part II, Question II - P.2

       in the whole Province is coming to meet us, and she can cast a spell on men by only looking
       at them.” But I obstinately boasted that I had never been afraid of such; and hardly had I
       uttered the words before I felt myself grievously hurt in the left foot, so that I could not
       move it from the ground or take a step without the greatest pain. Whereupon they quickly
       sent to the castle for a horse for me, and thus led me back. But the pains went on increasing
       for three days.
             The people of the castle, understanding that I had been bewitched, related what had
       happened to a certain peasant who lived about a mile away, whom they knew to have skill in
       removing spells. This man quickly came and, after examining my foot, said, “I will test
       whether these pains are due to a natural cause; and if I find that they are due to witchcraft, I
       will cure you with the help of God; but if they are not, you must have recourse to natural
       remedies.” Whereupon I made reply, “If I can be cured without any magic, and with the help
       of God, I will gladly agree; but I will have nothing to do with the devil, nor do I wish for his
       help.” And the peasant promised that he would use none except lawful means, and that he
       would cure me by the help of God, provided that he could make certain that my pains were
       due to witchcraft. So I consented to his proposals. Then he took molten lead (in the manner
       of another witch whom we have mentioned), and held it in an iron ladle over my foot, and
       poured it into a bowl of water; and immediately there appeared the shapes of various things,
       as if thorns and hairs and bones and such things had been put into the bowl. “Now,” he said,
       “I see that this infirmity is not natural, but certainly due to witchcraft.” And when I asked
       him how he could tell this from the molten lead, he answered, “There are seven metals
       belonging to the seven planets; and since Saturn is the Lord of lead, when lead is poured out
       over anyone who has been bewitched, it is his property to discover the witchcraft by his
       power. And so it has surely proved, and you will soon be cured; yet I must visit you for as
       many days as you have been under this spell.” And he asked me how many days had passed;
       and when I told him that was the third day, he came to see me on each of the next three
       days, and merely by examining and touching my foot and by saying over to himself certain
       words, he dissolved the charm and restored me to complete health.
             In this case it is clear that the healer is not a witch, although his method is something
       superstitious. For in that he promised a cure by the help of God, and not by devils' work, and
       that he alleged the influence of Saturn over lead, he was irreproachable and rather to be
       commended. But there remains some small doubt as to the power by which the witch's spell
       was removed, and the figures caused in the lead. For no witchcraft can be removed by any
       natural power, although it may be assuaged, as will be proved later where we speak of the
       remedies for those who are possessed: therefore it seems that he performed this cure by
       means of at least some tacit pact with a devil. And we call such a pact tacit when the
       practitioner agrees tacitly, at any rate, to employ the devil's aid. And in this way many
       superstitious works are done, but with a varying degree of offence to the Creator, since there
       may be far more offence to Him in one operation than in another.
             Yet because this peasant was certain of effecting a cure, and because he had to visit the
       patient for as many days as he had been ill, and although he used no natural remedies, yet
       cured him according to the promise made; for these reasons, although he had entered into no
       open pact with the devil, he is to be judged not only as a suspect, but as one plainly guilty of
       heresy, and must be considered as convicted and subject at least to the penalties set out
       below in the second method of sentencing; but his punishment must be accompanied with a
       solemn adjuration, unless he is protected by other laws which seem to be of a contrary

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b00b.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:41 PM]
Part II, Question II - P.2

       intention; and what the Ordinary should do in such a case will be shown later in the solution
       of the arguments.
             The fourth class of remedies, concerning which the Canonists are in partial agreement
       with some of the Theologians, is said to be no worse than idle and vain; since it is
       superstitious only, and there is no pact either open or tacit with the devil as regards the
       intention or purpose of the practitioner. And I say that the Canonists and some Theologians
       are only partially agreed that this sort of remedy is to be tolerated; for their agreement or
       non-agreement depends upon whether or not they class this sort of remedies together with
       the third sort. But this sort of vain remedy is exemplified above in the case of the women
       who beat the pail hung over the fire in order that the witch may be beaten who has caused a
       cow to be drained of milk; although this may be done either in the name of the devil or
       without any reference to him.
             We may adduce other examples of the same kind. For sometimes when a cow has been
       injured in this way, and they wish to discover who has bewitched it, they drive it out into the
       fields with a man's trousers, or some unclean thing, upon its head or back. And this they do
       chiefly on Feast Days and Holy Days, and possibly with some sort of invocation of the
       devil; and they beat the cow with a stick and drive it away. Then the cow runs straight to the
       house of the witch, and beats vehemently upon the door with its horns, lowing loudly all the
       while; and the devil causes the cow to go on doing this until it is pacified by some other
       witchcraft.
             Actually, and according to the aforesaid Doctors, such remedies can be tolerated, but
       they are not meritorious, as some try to maintain. For S. Paul says that everything which we
       do, in word or deed, must be done in the name of Our Lord JESUS Christ. Now in this sort
       of remedy there may be no direct invocation of the devil, and yet the devil's name may be
       mentioned: and again there may be no intention to do such things by means of any open or
       tacit pact with the devil, yet a man may say, “I wish to do this, whether the devil has any
       part in it or not”; and that very temerity, by putting aside the fear of God, offends God, Who
       therefore grants the devil power to accomplish such cures. Therefore they who use such
       practices must be led into the way of penitence, and urged to leave such things and turn
       rather to the remedies of which we shall speak later, though we have touched upon them
       before, namely, the use of Holy Water and Blessed Salt and exorcisms, etc.
                                                                 Page 2 of 3


                                                Question II Continued . . . .

                                                      Main Index


                                                        Part II, Question II
                                               was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                             HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                     All Rights Reserved.



file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b00b.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:41 PM]
Notes

           “Ochozias,” who when sick “sent messengers, saying to them: Go, consult Beelzebub,
        the god of Hecaron, whether I shall recover of this my illness. And an angel of the Lord
        spoke to Elias the Thesbite, saying: Arise, and go up to meet the messengers of the king of
        Samaria, and say to them: Is there not a God in Israel, that he go to consult Beelzebub, the
        god of Hecaron? Wherefore thus saith the Lord: From the bed on which thou art gone up
        thou shalt not come down, but thou shalt surely die.”




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2051.html [2002-01-20 12:03:41 PM]
Part II, Question II - P.3


                                     THE
                             MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                           PART II, QUESTION II. CONTINUED

             In the same light should be regarded those who use the following method. When an
       animal has been killed by witchcraft, and they wish to find out the witch, or to make certain
       whether its death was natural or due to witchcraft, they go to the place where dead animals
       are skinned, and drag the intestines along the ground up to their house; not into the house
       through the main door, but over the threshold of the back entrance into the kitchen; and then
       they make a fire and put the intestines over it on a hurdle. Then, according to what we have
       very often been told, just as the intestines get hot and burn, so are the intestines of the witch
       afflicted with burning pains. But when they perform this experiment they take great care that
       the door is securely locked; because the witch is compelled by her pains to try to enter the
       house, and if she can take a coal from the fire, all her pains will disappear. And we have
       often been told that, when she is unable to enter the house, she surrounds it inside and out
       with the densest fog, with such horrible shrieks and commotions that at last all those in the
       house think the roof is verily going to fall down and crush them unless they open the door.
             Certain other experiments are of the same nature. For sometimes people pick out the
       witches from a number of women in church by causing the witches to be unable to leave the
       church without their permission, even after the service is finished. And they do it in this
       way. On a Sunday they smear the shoes of the young men with grease, lard or pigs' fat, as is
       their wont when they wish to repair and renew the freshness of the leather, and thus the
       juvenals enter the church, whence it is impossible for any witches who are present to make
       their way out or depart until those who are anxious to espy them either go away themselves
       or give them express leave to make their way to their homes (see note).
             It is the same with certain words, which it is not expedient to mention lest anyone
       should be seduced by the devil to use them. For judges and magistrates should not attach too
       much weight to the evidence of those who pretend to discover witches by this means, for
       fear lest the devil, that wily enemy, should induce them under this pretext to defame
       innocent women. Therefore such persons must be enjoined to seek the remedy of penitence.
       However, practices of this kind are on occasion to be tolerated and allowed.
             In this way we have answered the arguments that no spell of witchcraft must be
       removed. For the first two remedies are altogether unlawful. The third remedy is tolerated
       by the law, but needs very careful examination on the part of the ecclesiastical judge. And
       what the civil law tolerates is shown in the chapter on witches, where it is said that those
       who have skill to prevent men's labours from being vitiated by tempests and hailstorms are
       worthy, not of punishment, but of reward. S. Antoninus also, in his Summa, points out this
       discrepancy between the Canon Law and civil law. Therefore it seems that the civil law
       concedes the legality of such practices for the preservation of crops and cattle, and that in
       any event certain men who use such arts are not only to be tolerated but even rewarded.
       Wherefore the ecclesiastical judge must take particular note whether the methods used in


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b00c.html (1 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:03:41 PM]
Part II, Question II - P.3

       counteraction of hailstorms and tempests are within the spirit of the law, or whether they are
       in any way superstitious; and then, if no scandal to the Faith is involved, they can be
       tolerated. But actually this does not belong to the third method, but to the fourth, and also to
       the fifth, of which we shall speak later in the following chapters, where we deal with the
       ecclesiastical and lawful remedies, with which are sometimes included certain superstitious
       practices belonging to the fourth method.
                                                                 Page 3 of 3


                                                     Question II, Chapter I

                                                      Main Index


                                                        Part II, Question II
                                               was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                             HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                     All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b00c.html (2 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:03:41 PM]
Notes

           “Burning pains.” The following quotation is from an article “Witchcraft, Past and
        Present,” by Lady Peirse, that appeared in “Word-Lord,” Vol. I, No. 3 (pp. 122-28),
        May-June, 1926. The district to which reference is made is “a south-country village in
        England.” “A local farmer, whose cows and sheep ailed mysteriously, and showed all the
        usual signs of being ‘overlooked’ or bewitched, whilst things in general went wrong with
        him, consulted the witch doctor, and was told to repeat a certain charm last thing at night,
        to nail a sheep's heart to his front door, and on no account to open the door till morning, no
        matter what happened.
           “This the farmer did, and when his family had repaired to bed, he commenced his lonely
        vigil by the kitchen fire. After a while there came a thunderous knocking on the door, and a
        voice crying ‘Open and let me in.’ The voice was very urgent, but the farmer, though he
        trembled exceedingly, kept firm grip of himself and never moved from his chair. Then came
        the knocking a second time and a deplorable voice begging to be allowed in, but the farmer
        remained obdurate. Lastly came a feeble knocking and moaning. The farmer, who was
        greatly alarmed, remained at his post till the sun was up next morning. When he opened his
        door a neighbour lay stretched across his threshold dead.
           “The doctor, so my friend was told, believed it to be a case of heart failure. We can only
        imagine that the farmer and his family remained silent about the voice and the knocking at
        the door; perhaps no one but the farmer had heard. To the doctor, a simple though
        regrettable episode; to the farmer, an awesome case of retribution. To the world at large, a
        story that may be interpreted in many different ways; but with a lesson for all who run to
        read, namely, that it does not pay to practise withcraft or the indulgence of personal spite if
        there happens to be a witch doctor in the neighbourhood, since it is apparently quite an easy
        thing, with a little occult knowledge, to do the witch to death! Throughout many centuries
        witches in the long run always seem to come off second best. Faith and fear in their victims
        seem to lend them strength, just as faith and love help righteousness.”
           Not very many years ago a farmer and his wife who lived in the country just outside
        Milan came to the conclusion that their daughter, who had long been suffering from a
        mysterious ailment, which the best doctors in Milan seemed unable to diagnose and cure,
        was bewitched by an old woman dwelling in their villagem a wretch of notoriously bad
        reputation, whome the girl had unwittingly offended in some small way. Accordingly they
        resorted to a “wise man,” who lived in a small town a good many miles distant. He gave
        them a bundle of herbs, telling them to boil these in water and at the same times to recite a
        certain rune or rhyme which he taught them. He told them that if their daughter was indeed
        plagued by the malice of some individual, as the water boiled the witch who had cast the
        spell would be so tormented that she would hasten to their house and betray herself be
        begging them to take the cauldron from the fire. They could then refuse to do so unless she
        at once relived the girl from her sickness. They precisely obeyed the directions which had
        been given, and hardly had the water begun to bubble with the heat than there came running
        the hag whom they had suspected, imploring them with every symptom of intense agony to
        throw away the contents of the pot. This they would not do unless the charm was broken. In
        her despair the old woman promised to restore their daughter to health, and from that time
        the child rapidly began to mend until she was as stout and sturdy as any lass in the whole
        country-side.



file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2052.html [2002-01-20 12:03:41 PM]
Notes

            The text of this passage seems corrupt and varies considerably in the later editions. The
        earliest edition of the “Malleus” in the British museum reads: “Nam die dnico sotularia
        iuuenu fungia seu pinguedie proci vt moris e p restauratoe fieri pungut et sic vbi ecclesia
        intrat tadiu malefice exire eccias non poterut quo adusq: exploratores aut exeunt aut illis
        licentia sub expssione ut sup exeundi peedat.” “Die dnico” was almost immediately altered
        to “die dominica.” The usual reading is “die Dominica Sotularia, iuuenum fungia . . .”
        Venice, 1576, introduces a fresh error: “die dominica Solutaria iuuenum fungia. . . .” The
        Lyons text of 1669 has an excellent emendation, which is, no doubt, correct: “die Dominica
        Sotularia iuuenum axungia. . . .”




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2053.html [2002-01-20 12:03:42 PM]
Part II, Question II, Chapter I


                                  THE
                          MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                      PART II, QUESTION II.
                                                          CHAPTER I
              The Remedies prescribed by the Holy Church against Incubus and Succubus Devils.

             IN the foregoing chapters on the First Question we have treated of the methods of
       bewitching men, animals and the fruits of the earth, and especially of the behaviour of
       witches in their own persons; how they seduce young girls in order to increase their
       numbers; what is their method of profession and of offering homage; how they offer to
       devils their own children and the children of others; and how they are transported from place
       to place. Now I say that there is no remedy for such practises, unless witches be entirely
       eradicated by the judges, or at least punished as an example to all who may wish to imitate
       them; but we are not immediately treating of this point, which will be dealt with in the last
       Part of this work, where we set forth the twenty ways of proceeding against and sentencing
       witches.
             For the present we are concerned only with the remedies against the injuries which they
       inflict; and first how men who are bewitched can be cured; secondly, beasts, and thirdly,
       how the fruits of the earth may be secured from blight or phylloxera.
             With regard to the bewitchment of human beings by means of Incubus and Succubus
       devils, it is to be noted that this can happen in three ways. First, when women voluntarily
       prostitute themselves to Incubus devils. Secondly, when men have connexion with Succubus
       devils; yet it does not appear that men thus devilishly fornicate with the same full degree of
       culpability; for men, being by nature intellectually stronger than women, are more apt to
       abhor such practises.
             There is in the town of Coblenz a poor man who is bewitched in this way. In the
       presence of his wife he is in the habit of acting after the manner of men with women, that is
       to say, of practising coition, as it were, and he continues to do this repeatedly, nor have the
       cries and urgent appeals of his wife any effect in making him desist. And after he has
       fornicated thus two or three times, he bawls out, “We are going to start all over again”;
       when actually there is no person visible to mortal sight lying with him. And after an
       incredible number of such bouts, the poor man at last sinks to the floor utterly exhausted.
       When he has recovered his strength a little and is asked how this happened to him, and
       whether he has had any women with him, he answers that he saw nothing, but his mind is in
       some way possessed so that he can by no means refrain from such priapism. And indeed he
       harbours a great suspicion that a certain woman bewitched him in this way, because he had
       offended her, and she had cursed him with threatening words, telling him what she would
       like to happen to him.
             But there are no laws or ministers of justice which can proceed to the avenging of so
       great a crime with no other warrant than a vague charge or a grave suspicion; for it is held
       that no one ought to be condemned unless he has been convicted by his own confession, or

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b01a.html (1 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:42 PM]
Part II, Question II, Chapter I

       by the evidence of three trustworthy witnesses, since the mere fact of the crime coupled with
       even the gravest suspicions against some person is not sufficient to warrant the punishment
       of that person. But this matter will be dealt with later.
              As for instances where young maidens are molested by Incubus devils in this way, it
       would take too long to mention even those that have been known to happen in our own time,
       for there are very many well-attested stories of such bewitchments. But the great difficulty
       of finding a remedy for such afflictions can be illustrated from a story told by Thomas of
       Brabant in his Book on Bees.
              I saw, he writes, and heard the confession of a virgin in a religious habit, who said at
       first that she had never been a consenting party to fornication, but at the same time have
       been known in this way. This I could not believe, but narrowly charged and exhorted her,
       with the most solemn adjurations, to speak the truth on peril of her very soul. At last,
       weeping bitterly, she acknowledged that she had been corrupted rather in mind than in body;
       and that though she had afterwards grieved almost to death, and had daily confessed with
       tears, yet by no device or study or art could she be delivered from an Incubus devil, nor yet
       by the sign of the Cross, nor by Holy Water, which are specially ordained for the expulsion
       of devils, nor even by the Sacrament of the Body of Our Lord, which even the Angels fear.
       But at last after many years of prayer and fasting she was delivered.
              It may be believed (saving a better judgement) that, after she repented and confessed
       her sin, the Incubus devil should be regarded rather in the light of a punishment for sin than
       as a sin in itself.
              A devout nun, named Christina, in the Low Country of the Duchy of Brabant, told me
       the following concerning this same woman. On the vigil of one Pentacost the woman came
       to her complaining that she dared not take the Sacrament because of the importunate
       molestation of a devil. Christina, pitying her, said: “Go, and rest assured that you will
       receive the Body of Our Lord to-morrow; for I will take your punishment upon myself.” So
       she went away joyfully, and after praying the night slept in peace, and rose up in the
       morning and communicated in all tranquility of the soul. But Christina, not thinking of the
       punishment she had taken upon herself, went to her rest in the evening, and as she lay in bed
       hear, as it were, a violent attack being made upon her; and, seizing whatever it was by the
       throat, tried to throw it off. She lay down again, but was again molested, and rose up in
       terror; and this happened many times, whilst all the straw of her bed was turned over and
       thrown about everywhere, so at length she perceived that she was being persecuted by the
       malice of a devil. Thereupon she left her pallet, and passed a sleepless night; and when she
       wished to pray, she was so tormented by the devil that she said she had never suffered so
       much before. In the morning, therefore, saying to the other woman, “I renounce your
       punishment, and I am hardly alive to renounce it,” she escaped from the violence of that
       wicked tempter. From this it can be seen how difficult it is to cure this sort of evil, whether
       or not it is due to witchcraft.
              However, there are still some means by which these devils may be driven away, of
       which Nider writes in his Formicarius. He says that there are five ways by which girls or
       men can be delivered: first, by Sacramental Confession; second, by the Sacred Sign of the
       Cross, or by the recital of the Angelic Salutation; third, by the use of exorcisms; fourth, by
       moving to another place; and fifth, by means of excommunication prudently employed by
       holy men. It is evident from what has been said that the first two methods did not avail the


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b01a.html (2 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:42 PM]
Part II, Question II, Chapter I

       nun; but they are not on that account to be neglected, for that which cures one person does
       not necessarily cure another, and conversely. And it is a recorded fact that Incubus devils
       have often been driven away by the Lord's Prayer, or by the sprinkling of Holy Water, and
       also especially by the Angelic Salutation.
             For S. Caesarius tells in his Dialogue that, after a certain priest had hanged himself, his
       concubine entered a convent, where she was carnally solicited by an Incubus. She drove him
       away by crossing herself and using Holy Water, yet he immediately returned. But when she
       recited the Angelic Salutation, he vanished like an arrow shot from a bow; still he came
       back, although he did not dare to come near her, because of the Ave MARIA.
             S. Caesarius also refers to the remedy of Sacramental Confession. For he says that the
       aforesaid concubine was entirely abandoned by the Incubus after she was clean confessed.
       He tells also of a man in Leyden who was plagued by a Succubus, and was entirely
       delivered after Sacramental Confession.
             He adds yet another example, of an enclosed nun, a contemplative, whom an Incubus
       would not leave in spite of prayers and confession and other religious exercises. For he
       persisted in forcing his way to her bed. But when, acting on the advice of a certain religious
       man, she uttered the word Benedicite, the devil at once left her.
             Of the fourth method, that of moving to another place, he says that a certain priest's
       daughter had been defiled by an Incubus and driven frantic with grief; but when she went
       away across the Rhine, she was left in peace by the Incubus. Her father, however, because
       he had sent her away, was so afflicted by the devil that he died within three days.
             He also maintains a woman who was often molested by an Incubus in her own bed, and
       asked a devout friend of hers to come and sleep with her. She did so, and was troubled all
       night with the utmost uneasiness and disquiet, and then the first woman was left in peace.
       William of Paris notes also that Incubus seem chiefly to molest women and girls with
       beautiful hair; either because they devote themselves too much to the care and adornment of
       their hair, or because they are boastfully vain about it, or because God in His goodness
       permits this so that women may be afraid to entice men by the very means by which the
       devils wish them to entice men.
             The fifth method, that of excommunication, which is perhaps the same as exorcism, is
       exemplified in a history of S. Bernard. In Aquitaine a woman had for six years been
       molested by an Incubus with incredible carnal abuse and lechery; and she heard the Incubus
       threaten her that she must not go near the holy man, who was coming that way, saying: “It
       will avail you nothing: for when he was gone away, I, who have till now been your lover,
       will become the cruellest of tyrants to you.” None the less she went to S. Bernard, and he
       said to her: “Take my staff and set it in your bed, and may the devil do what he can.” When
       she had done this, the devil did not dare to enter the woman's room, but threatened her
       terribly from outside, saying that he would persecute her when S. Bernard had gone away.
       When S. Bernard heard this from the woman, he called the people together, bidding them
       carry lighted candles in their hands, and, with the whole assembly which was gathered,
       excommunicated the devil, forbidding him evermore to approach that woman or any other.
       And so she was delivered from that punishment.
             Here it is to be noted that the power of the Keys granted to S. Peter and his successors,
       which resounds on the earth, is really a power of healing granted to the Church on behalf of
       travellers who are subject to the jurisdiction of the Papal power; therefore is seems


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b01a.html (3 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:42 PM]
Part II, Question II, Chapter I

       wonderful that even the Powers of the air can be warded off by this virtue. But it must be
       remembered that persons who are molested by devils are under the jurisdiction of the Pope
       and his Keys; and therefore it is not surprising if such Powers are indirectly kept at bay by
       the virtue of the Keys, just as by the same virtue the souls in purgatory can indirectly by
       delivered from the pains of fire; insasmuch as this Power availeth upon the earth, ay, and to
       the relief of souls that are under the earth.
             But it is not seemly to discuss the Power of the Keys granted to the Head of the Church
       as Christ's Vicar; since it is know that, for the use of the Church, Christ granted to the
       Church and His Vicar as much power as it is possible for God to grant to mere man.
             And it is piously to be believed that, when infirmities inflicted by witches through the
       power of devils, together with the witches and devils themselves, are excommunicated,
       those who were afflicted will no longer be tormented; and that they will be delivered all the
       sooner by the use of other lawful exorcisms in addition.
             There is a common report current in the districts of the river Etsch, as also in other
       places, that by the permission of God a swarm of locusts came and devoured all the vines,
       green leaves and crops; and that they were suddenly put to flight and dispersed by means of
       this kind of excommunication and cursing. Now it any wish that this should ascribed to
       some holy man, and not to the virtue of the Keys, let ie be so, in the name of the Lord; but of
       one thing we are certain, that both the power to perform miracles and the power of the Keys
       necessarily presuppose a condition of grace in him who performs that act of grace, since
       both these powers proceed from grace granted to men who are in a state of grace.
             Again, it is to be noted that, if none of the aforesaid remedies are of any avail, then
       recourse must be had to the usual exorcisms, of which we shall treat later. And if even these
       are not sufficient to banish the iniquity of the devil, then that affliction must be considered
       to be an expiatory punishment for sin, which should be borne in all meekness, as are other
       ills of this sort which oppress us that they may, as it were, drive us to seek God.
             But it must also be remarked that sometimes persons only think they are molested by
       an Incubus when they are not so actually; and this is more apt to be the case with women
       than with men, for they are more timid and liable to imagine extraordinary things.
             In this connexion William of Paris is often quoted. He says: Many phantastical
       apparitions occur to person suffering fro a melancholy disease, especially to women, as is
       shown by their dreams and visions. And the reason for this, as physicians know, is that
       women's souls are by nature far more easily and lightly impressionable than men's souls.
       And he adds: I know that I have seen a woman who thought that a devil copulated with her
       from inside, and said she was physically conscious of such incredible things.
             At time also women think they have been made pregnant by an Incubus, and their
       bellies grow to an enormous size; but when the time of parturition comes, their swelling is
       relieved by no more than the expulsion of a great quantity of wind. For by taking ants' eggs
       in drink, or the seeds of spurge or of the black pine, an incredible amount of wind and
       flatulence is generated in the human stomach. And it is very easy for the devil to cause these
       and even greater disorders in the stomach. This has been set down in order that too easy
       credence should not be given to women, but only to those whom experience has shown to be
       trustworthy, and to those who, by sleeping in their beds or near them, know for a fact that
       such things as we have spoken of are true.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b01a.html (4 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:42 PM]
Part II, Question II, Chapter I




                                                    Question II, Chapter II

                                                      Main Index


                                                   Part II, Question II, Chapter I
                                               was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                         HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                 All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b01a.html (5 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:42 PM]
Notes

           “Incubus.” Sinistrari tells of a case which came under his own notice when a deacon, a
        monk of the Certosa at Pavia, was sorely vexed by an Incubus. Exorcisms seemed
        unavailing; the Incubus himself in the shape of Father Prior blessed the place with Holy
        Water. However, the demon was at last banished. See my translation, “Demoniality,” pp.
        57-59, and passim.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2054.html [2002-01-20 12:03:43 PM]
Notes

           “Caesarius.” A learned monk of the Cistercian monastery of Heisterback near Bonn,
        born about 1170 at Cologne, died about 1240 as Prior of Heisterbach. Abbot Henry
        requested Caesarius to draw up an abstract of his teaching, and this resulted in the famous
        “Dialogue magnus uisionum atque miraculorum, Libri XII,” which it is no exaggeration to
        say was probably the most popular book in Germany of its period. More than fifty MSS. are
        extant, and seven printed editions are known. The latest, two volumes, was edited by
        Strange, Cologne, 1851; an index to this followed, Cologne, 1857.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2055.html [2002-01-20 12:03:43 PM]
Part II, Question II, Chapter II


                                   THE
                           MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                      PART II, QUESTION II.
                                                          CHAPTER II

      Remedies prescribed for Those who are Bewitched by the Limitation of the Generative Power.

             Although far more women are witches than men, as was shown in the First Part of the
       work, yet men are more often bewitched than women. And the reason for this lies in the fact
       that God allows the devil more power over the venereal act, by which the original sin is
       handed down, than over other human actions. In the same way He allows more witchcraft to
       be performed by means of serpents, which are more subject to incantations than other
       animals, because that was the first instrument of the devil. And the venereal act can be more
       readily and easily bewitched in a man than in a woman, as has been clearly shown. For there
       are five ways in which the devil can impede the act of generation, and they are more easily
       operated against men.
             As far as possible we shall set out the remedies which can be applies in each separate
       kind of obstruction; and let him who is bewitched in this faculty take note to which class of
       obstruction he belongs. For there are five classes, according to Peter a Palude in his Fourth
       Book, dist. 34, of the trial of this sort of bewitchment.
             For the devil, being a spirit, has by his very nature power, with God's permission, over
       a bodily creature, especially to promote or to prevent local motion. So by this power they
       can prevent the bodies of men and women from approaching each other; and this either
       directly or indirectly. Directly, when they remove one to a distance from another, and do not
       allow him to approach the other. Indirectly, when they cause some obstruction, or when they
       interpose themselves in an assumed body. So it happened that a young Pagan who had
       married an idol, but none the less contracted a marriage with a girl; but because of this he
       was unable to copulate with her, as has been shown above.
             Secondly, the devil can inflame a man towards one woman and render him impotent
       towards another; and this he can secretly cause by the application of certain herbs or other
       matters of which he well knows the virtue for this purpose.
             Thirdly, he can disturb the apperception of a man or a woman, so that he makes one
       appear hideous to the other; for, as has been shown, he can influence the imagination.
             Fourthly, he can suppress the vigour of that member which is necessary for
       procreation; just as he can deprive any organ of the power of local motion.
             Fifthly, he can prevent the flow of the semen to the members in which is the motive
       power, by as it were closing the seminal duct so that it does not descend to the genital
       vessels, or does not ascend again from them, or cannot come forth, or is spent vainly.
             But if a man should say: I do not know by which of these different methods I have been
       bewitched; all I know is that I cannot do anything with my wife: he should be answered in
       this way. If he is active and able with regard to other women, but not with his wife, then he


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b02a.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:43 PM]
Part II, Question II, Chapter II

       is bewitched in the second way; for he can be certified as to the first way, that he is being
       deluded by Succubus or Incubus devils. Moreover, if he does not find his wife repellent, and
       yet cannot know her, but can know other women, then again it is the second way; but if he
       finds her repellent and cannot copulate with her, then it is the second and the third way. If he
       does not find her repellent and wishes to have connexion with her, but has no power in his
       member, then it is the fourth way. But if he has power in his member, yet cannot emit his
       semen, then it is the fifth way. The method of curing these will be shown where we consider
       whether those who live in grace and those who do not are equally liable to be bewitched in
       these manners; and we answer that they are not, with the exception of the fourth manner,
       and even then very rarely. For such an affliction can happen to a man living in grace and
       righteousness; but the reader must understand that in this case we speak of the conjugal act
       between married people; for in any other case they are all liable to bewitchment; for every
       venereal act outside wedlock is a mortal sin, and is only committed by those who are not in
       a state of grace.
             We have, indeed, the authority of the whole of Scriptural teaching that God allows the
       devil to afflict sinners more than the just. For although that most just man, Job, was stricken,
       yet he was not so particularly or directly in respect of the procreant function. And it may be
       said that, when a married couple are afflicted in this way, either both the parties or one of
       them is not living in a state of grace; and this opinion is substantiated in the Scriptures both
       by authority and by reason. For the Angel said to Tobias: The devil receives power against
       those who are given over to lust: and he proved it in the slaying of the seven husbands of the
       virgin Sara.
             Cassian, in his Collation of the Fathers, quotes S. Antony as saying that the devil can
       in no way enter our mind or body unless he has first deprived it of all holy thoughts and
       made it empty and bare of spiritual contemplation. These words should not be applies to an
       evil affliction over the whole of the body, for when Job was so afflicted he was not denuded
       of Divine grace; but they have particular reference to a particular infirmity inflicted upon the
       body for some sin. And the infirmity we are considering can only be due to the sin of
       incontinence. For, as we have said, God allows the devil more power over that act than over
       other human acts, because of its natural nastiness, and because by it the first sin was handed
       down to posterity. Therefore when people joined in matrimony have for some sin been
       deprived of Divine help, God allows them to be bewitched chiefly in their procreant
       functions.
             But if it is asked of what sort are those sins, it can be said, according to S. Jerome, that
       even in a state of matrimony it is possible to commit the sin of incontinence in various ways.
       See the text: He who loves his wife to excess is an adulterer. And they who love in this way
       are more liable to be bewitched after the manner we have said.
             The remedies of the Church, then, are twofold: one applicable in the public court, the
       other in the tribunal of the confessional. As for the first, when it has been publicly found that
       the impotence is due to witchcraft, then it must be distinguished whether it is temporary or
       permanent. If it is only temporary, it does not annul the marriage. And it is assumed to be
       temporary if, within the space of three years, by using every possible expedient of the
       Sacraments of the Church and other remedies, a cure can be caused. But if, after that time,
       they cannot be cured by any remedy, then it is assumed to be permanent.
             Now the disability either precedes both the contract and the consummation of marriage;


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b02a.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:43 PM]
Part II, Question II, Chapter II

       and in this case it impedes the contract: or it follows the contract but precedes the
       consummation; and in this case it annuls the contract. For men are very often bewitched in
       this way because they have cast off their former mistresses, who, hoping that they were to
       be married and being disappointed, so bewitch the men that they cannot copulate with
       another woman. And in such a case, according to the opinion of many, the marriage already
       contracted is annulled, unless, like Our Blessed Lady and S. Joseph they are willing to live
       together in holy continence. This opinion is supported by the Canon where it says (23, q. I)
       that a marriage is confirmed by the carnal act. And a little later it says that impotence before
       such confirmation dissolves the ties of marriage.
             Or else the disability follows the consummation of a marriage, and then it does not
       dissolve the bonds of matrimony. Much more to this effect is noted by the Doctors, where in
       various writings they treat of the obstruction due to witchcraft; but since it is not precisely
       relevant to the present inquiry, it is here omitted.
             But some may find it difficult to understand how this function can be obstructed in
       respect of one woman but not of another. S. Bonaventura answers that this may be because
       some witch has persuaded the devil to effect this only with respect to one woman, or
       because God will not allow the obstruction to apply save to some particular woman. The
       judgement of God in this matter is a mystery, as in the case of the wife of Tobias. But how
       the devil procures this disability is plainly shown by what has already been said. And S.
       Bonaventura says that he obstructs the procreant function, not intrinsically by harming the
       organ, but extrinsically by impeding its use; and it is an artificial, not a natural impediment;
       and so he an cause it to apply to one woman and not to another. Or else he takes away all
       desire for one or another woman; and this he does by his own power, or else by means of
       some herb or stone or some occult creature. And in this he is in substantial agreement with
       Peter a Palude.
             The ecclesiastical remedy in the tribunal of God is set forth in the Canon where it says:
       If with the permission of the just and secret judgement of God, through the arts of
       sorceresses and witches and the preparation of the devil, men are bewitched in their
       procreant function, they are to be urged to make clean confession to God and His priest of
       all their sins with a contrite heart and a humble spirit; and to make satisfaction to God with
       many tears and large offerings and prayers and fasting.
             From these words it is clear that such afflictions are only on account of sin, and occur
       only to those who do not live in a state of grace. It proceeds to tell how the ministers of the
       Church can effect a cure by means of exorcisms and the other protections and cures
       provided by the Church. In this way, with the help of God, Abraham cured by his prayers
       Abimelech and his house.
             In conclusion we may say that there are five remedies which may lawfully be applied
       to those who are bewitched in this way: namely, a pilgrimage to some holy and venerable
       shrine; true confession of their sins with contrition; the plentiful use of the sign of the Cross
       and devout prayer; lawful exorcism by solemn words, the nature of which will be explained
       later; and lastly, a remedy can be effected by prudently approaching the witch, as was shown
       in the case of the Count who for three years was unable to cohabit carnally with a virgin
       whom he had married.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b02a.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:43 PM]
Part II, Question II, Chapter II

                                                   Question II, Chapter III

                                                      Main Index


                                                   Part II, Question II, Chapter II
                                                  was transcribed by Christie Rice.

                         HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                 All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b02a.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:43 PM]
Notes

           “Tobias.” “Tobias” vi, 16 and 17: Then the angel Raphael said to him: Hear me, and I
        will show thee who they are, over whom the devil can prevail. For they who in such manner
        receive matrimony as to shut out God from themselves, and from their mind, and to give
        themselves to their lust, as the horse and mule, which have not understanding, over them the
        devil hath power.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2056.html [2002-01-20 12:03:44 PM]
Notes

           ”Abimelech.” “Genesis” xx.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2057.html [2002-01-20 12:03:44 PM]
Part II, Question II, Chapter III


                                   THE
                           MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                      PART II, QUESTION II.
                                                         CHAPTER III
                          Remedies prescribed for those who are Bewitched by being Inflamed
                                    with Inordinate Love or Extraordinary Hatred.

             JUST as the generative faculty can be bewitched, so can inordinate love or hatred be
       caused in the human mind. First we shall consider the cause of this, and then, as far as
       possible, the remedies.
             Philocaption, or inordinate love of one person for another, can be caused in three ways.
       Sometimes it is due merely to a lack of control over the eyes; sometimes to the temptation of
       devils; sometimes to the spells of necromancers and witches, with the help of devils.
             The first is spoken of in S. James i. 14, 15: Every man is tempted by his own
       concupiscence, being drawn away and allured. Then when concupiscence hath conceived, it
       bringeth forth sin: but sin, when it is completed, begetteth death. And so, when Shecham
       saw Dinah going out to see the daughters of the land, he loved her, and ravished her, and lay
       with her, and his soul clave unto her (Genesis xxxiv). And here the gloss says that this
       happened to an infirm spirit because she left her own concerns to inquire into those of other
       people; and such a soul is seduced by bad habits, and is led to consent to unlawful practices.
             The second cause arises from the temptation of devils. In this way Amnon loved his
       beautiful sister Tamar, and was so vexed that he fell sick for love of her (II. Samuel xiii).
       For he could not have been so totally corrupt in his mind as to fall into so great a crime of
       incest unless he had been grievously tempted by the devil. The book of the Holy Fathers
       refers to this kind of love, where it says that even in their hermitages they were exposed to
       every temptation, including that of carnal desires; for some of them were at times tempted
       with the love of women more than it is possible to believe. S. Paul also says, in II.
       Corinthians xii: There was given to me a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet
       me: and the gloss explains this as referring to the temptation of lust.
             But it is said that when a man does not give way to temptation he does not sin, but it is
       an exercise for his virtue; but this is to be understood of the temptation of the devil, not of
       that of the flesh; for this is a venial sin even if a man does not yield to it. Many examples of
       this are to be read.
             As for the third cause, by which inordinate love proceeds from devils' and witches'
       works, the possibility of this sort of witchcraft has been exhaustively considered in the
       Questions of the First Part as to whether devils through the agency of witches can turn the
       minds of men to inordinate love or hatred, and it was proved by examples which had fallen
       within our own experience. Indeed this is the best known and most general form of
       witchcraft.
             But the following question may be asked: Peter has been seized with an inordinate love
       of this description, but he does not know whether it is due to the first or the second or the

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b03a.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:45 PM]
Part II, Question II, Chapter III

       third cause. It must be answered that it can be by the work of the devil that hatred is stirred
       up between married people so as to cause the crime of adultery. But when a man is so bound
       in the meshes of carnal lust and desire that he can be made to desist from it by no shame,
       words, blows or action; and when a man often puts away his beautiful wife to cleave to the
       most hideous of women, and when he cannot rest in the night, but is so demented that he
       must go by devious ways to his mistress; and when it is found that those of noblest birth,
       Governors, and other rich men, are the most miserably involved in this sin (for this age is
       dominated by women, and was foretold by S. Hildegard, as Vincent of Beauvais records in
       the Mirror of History, although he said it would note endure for as long as it already has);
       and when the world is now full of adultery, especially among the most highly born; when all
       this is considered, I say, of what use is it to speak of remedies to those who desire no
       remedy? Nevertheless, for the satisfaction of the pious reader, we will set down briefly some
       of the remedies for Philocaption when it is not due to witchcraft.
             Avicenna mentions seven remedies which may be used when a man is made physically
       ill by this sort of love; but they are hardly relevant to our inquiry except in so far as they
       may be of service to the sickness of the soul. For he says, in Book III, that the root of the
       sickness may be discovered by feeling the pulse and uttering the name of the object of the
       patient's love; and then, if the law permits, he may be cured by yielding to nature. Or certain
       medicines may be applied, concerning which he gives instructions. Or the sick man may be
       turned from his love by lawful remedies which will cause him to direct his love to a more
       worthy object. Or he may avoid her presence, and so distract his mind from her. Or, if he is
       open to correction, he may be admonished and expostulated with, to the effect that such love
       is the greatest misery. Or he may be directed to someone who, as far as he may with God's
       truth, will vilify the body and disposition of his love, and so blacken her character that she
       may appear to him altogether base and deformed. Or, finally, he is to be set to arduous
       duties which may distract his thoughts.
             Indeed, just as the animal nature of man may be cured by such remedies, so may they
       all be of use in reforming his inner spirit. Let a man obey the law of his intellect rather than
       that of nature, let him turn his love to safe pleasures, let him remember how momentary is
       the fruition of lust and how eternal the punishment, let him seek his pleasure in that life
       where joys begin never to end, and let him consider that if he cleaves to this earthly love,
       that will be his sole reward, but he will lose the bliss of Heaven, and be condemned to
       eternal fire: behold! the three irrevocable losses which proceed from inordinate lust.
             With regard to Philocaption caused by witchcraft, the remedies detailed in the
       preceding chapter may not inconveniently be applied here also; especially the exorcisms by
       sacred words which the bewitched person can himself use. Let him daily invoke the
       Guardian Angel deputed to him by God, let him use confession and frequent the shrines of
       the Saints, especially of the Blessed Virgin, and without doubt he will be delivered.
             But how abject are those strong men who, discarding their natural gifts and the armour
       of virtue, cease to defend themselves; whereas the girls themselves in their invincible frailty
       use those very rejected weapons to repel this kind of witchcraft. We give one out of many
       examples in their praise.
             There was in a country village near Lindau in the diocese of Constance a grown maid
       fair to see and of even more elegant behaviour, at sight of whom a certain man of loose
       principles, a cleric in sooth, but not a priest, was smitten with violent pangs of love. And


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b03a.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:45 PM]
Part II, Question II, Chapter III

       being unable to conceal the wound in his heart any longer, he went to the place where the
       girl was working, and with fair words showed that he was in the net of the devil, beginning
       by venturing in words only to persuade the girl to grant him her love. She, perceiving by
       Divine instinct his meaning, and being chaste in mind and body, bravely answered him:
       Master, do not come to my house with such words, for modesty itself forbids. To this he
       replied: Although you will not be persuaded by gentle words to love me, yet I promise you
       that soon you will be compelled by my deeds to love me. Now that man was a suspected
       enchanter and wizard. The maiden considered his words as but empty air, and until then felt
       in herself no spark of carnal love for him; but after a short time she began to have amorous
       thoughts. Perceiving this, and being inspired by God, she sought the protection of the
       Mother of Mercy, and devoutly implored Her to intercede with Her Son to help her.
       Anxious, moreover, she went on a pilgrimage to a hermitage, where there was a church
       miraculously consecrated in that diocese to the Mother of God. There she confessed her
       sins, so that no evil spirit could enter her, and after her prayers to the Mother of Pity all the
       devil's machinations against her ceased, so that these evil crafts thenceforth never afflicted
       her.
             None the less there are still some strong men cruelly enticed by witches to this sort of
       love, so that it would seem that they could never restrain themselves from their inordinate
       lust for them, yet these often most manfully resist the temptation of lewd and filthy
       enticements, and by the aforesaid defences overcome all the wiles of the devil.
             A rich young man in the town of Innsbruck provides us with a notable pattern of this
       sort of struggle. He was so importuned by witches that it is hardly possible for pen to
       describe his strivings, but he always kept a brave heart, and escaped by means of the
       remedies we have mentioned. Therefore it may justly be concluded that these remedies are
       infallible against this disease, and that they who use such weapons will most surely be
       delivered.
             And it must be understood that what we have said concerning inordinate love applies
       also to inordinate hatred, since the same discipline is of benefit for the two opposite
       extremes. But though the degree of witchcraft is equal in each, yet there is this difference in
       the case of hatred; the person who is hated must seek another remedy. For the man who
       hates his wife and puts her out of his heart will not easily, if he is an adulterer, be turned
       back again to his wife, even though he go on many a pilgrimage.
             Now it has been learned from witches that they cause this spell of hatred by means of
       serpents; for the serpent was the first instrument of the devil, and by reason of its curse
       inherits a hatred of women; therefore they cause such spells by placing the skin or head of a
       serpent under the threshold of a room or house. For this reason all the nooks and corners of
       the house where such a woman lives are to be closely examined and reconstructed as far as
       possible; or else she must be lodged in the houses of others.
             And when it is said the bewitched men can exorcise themselves, it is to be understood
       that they can wear the sacred words or benedictions of incantations round their necks, if they
       are unable to read or pronounce the benedictions; but it will be shown later in what way this
       should be done.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b03a.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:45 PM]
Part II, Question II, Chapter III

                                                   Question II, Chapter IV

                                                      Main Index


                                                  Part II, Question II, Chapter III
                                               was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                          HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                  All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b03a.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:45 PM]
Notes

           “S. Hildegard.” Born at Böckelheim on the Nahe, 1098; died on the Rupertsberg near
        Bingen, 1179. This great Benedictine seeress and prophetess has beenc alled the Sibyl of the
        Rhine. From her earliest years she was favoured with visions, and when she was aged about
        forty she received a Divine command to publish to the world what she had seen and heard.
        After much hesitation owing to her humility she obeyed, and in 1141 she commenced her
        profound treatise “Scivias” (“scire uias Domini”), which occupied her for ten years. It is
        ecstatic and prophetic throughout, and demands profoundest study. Herwegen, “Kirchl.
        Handlexikon” (1908), remarks that in order fully to appreciate this marvellous writer a new
        and critical edition of her writings must be prepared, a task entailing immense labour and
        research. No formal canonization of S. Hildegard has taken place, but many miracles were
        wrought at her intercession, and her name is in the Roman Martyrology. The feast is
        celebrated on 17 September in the dioceses of Speyer, Mainz, Trier and Limburg, and by the
        Solesmes monks on 18 September with a proper Office. The Relics of the Saint are at
        Eibingen, of which town she is patron. The convent of S. Hildegard there was formally
        constituted on 17 September, 1904.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2058.html [2002-01-20 12:03:45 PM]
Notes

            “Hermitage.” The famous shrine of Our Lady of the Hermit, at the Benedictine Abbey of
        Einsiedeln, in the Canton of Schwyz, Switzerland. S. Meinrad, who was assassinated by
        bandits in 861, had embraced the solitary life and established his hermitage on the slopes of
        Mount Etzel, when he built a small oratory for the wonder-working statue of Our Lady
        which had been given him by Abbess Hildegard of Zurich. Several anchorites succeeded
        him, and one of these, by name Eberhard, erected a monastery and church there. This fane
        was miraculously consecrated in 948 by Christ Himself, assisted by the Four Evangelists, S.
        Peter and S. Gregory the Great. Even the rationalistic Father Thurston, S.J., will be unable
        to impugn this holy marvel, as it was investigated and confirmed by Pope Leo VIII, and
        subsequently ratified by many a Pontiff, the last being Pius VI, who in 1793 confirmed the
        acts of all his predecessors. The miraculous statue is enthroned in a little chapel which
        stands within the great abbey church in much the same way as the Holy House at Loreto,
        encased in marbles and elaborate wood-work, the goal of ten thousand pilgrimages. The
        two chief days are the fourteenth of September and the thirteenth of October, the first being
        the anniversary of the Divine consecration of Eberhard's basilica, the second that of the
        translation of the Relics of S. Meinrad from Reichenau to Einsiedeln in 1039.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2059.html [2002-01-20 12:03:45 PM]
Part II, Question II, Chapter IV


                                  THE
                          MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                      PART II, QUESTION II.
                                                         CHAPTER IV
    Remedies prescribed for those who by Prestidigitative Art have lost their Virile Members or have
                       seemingly been Transformed into the Shapes of Beasts.

             In what has already been written it has clearly enough been shown the remedies which
       are available for the relief of those who are deluded by a glamour, and think that they have
       lost their virile member, or have been metamorphosed into animals. For since such men are
       entirely destitute of Divine grace, according to the essential condition of those who are so
       bewitched, it is not possible to apply a healing salve while the weapon still remains in the
       wound. Therefore before all things they must be reconciled to God by a good confession.
       Again, as was shown in the seventh chapter of the First Question of the Second Part, such
       members are never actually taken away from the body, but are only hidden by a glamour
       from the senses of sight and touch. It is clear, too, that those who live in grace are not so
       easily deluded in this way, either actively or passively, in such a manner, that is, that they
       seem to lose their members, or that those of others should appear to them to be missing.
       Therefore the remedy as well as the disease is explained in that chapter, namely, that they
       should as far as possible come to an amicable agreement with the witch herself.
             As to those who think that they have been changed into beasts, it must be known that
       this kind of witchcraft is more practised in Easter countries than in the West; that is to say,
       in the East witches more often bewitch other people in this way, but it appears that the
       witches so transform themselves more frequently in our part of the world; namely, when
       they change themselves, in full sight, into the shapes of animals, as was told in the eighth
       chapter. Therefore in their case the remedies to be used are those set out in the Third Part of
       this work, where we deal with the extermination of witches by the secular arm of the law.
             But in the East the following remedy is used for such delusions. For we have learned
       much of this matter from the Knights of the Order of S. John of Jerusalem in Rhodes; and
       especially this case which happened in the city of Salamis in the kingdom of Cyprus. For
       that is a seaport, and once when a vessel was being laden with merchandise suitable for a
       ship which is sailing into foreign parts, and all her company were providing themselves with
       victuals, one of them, a strong young man, went to the house of a woman standing outside
       the city on the seashore, and asked her if she had any eggs to sell. The woman, seeing that
       he was a strong young man, and a merchant far away from his own country, thought that on
       that account the people of the city would feel less suspicion if he were to be lost, and said to
       him: “Wait a little, and I will get you all that you want.” And when she went in and shut the
       door and kept him waiting, the young man outside began to call out to her to hurry, lest he
       should miss the ship. Then the woman brought some eggs and gave them to the young man,
       and told him to hurry back tot he ship in case he should miss it. So he hastened back to the
       ship, which was anchored by the shore, and before going on board, since the full company

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b04a.html (1 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:03:46 PM]
Part II, Question II, Chapter IV

       of his companions was not yet returned, he decided to eat the eggs there and refresh himself.
       And behold! an hour later he was made dumb as if he had no power of speech; and, as he
       afterwards said, he wondered what could have happened to him, but was unable to find out.
       Yet when he wished to go on board, he was driven off with sticks by those who yet
       remained ashore, and who all cried out: “Look what this ass is doing! Curse the beast, you
       are not coming on board.” The young man being thus driven away, and understanding from
       their words that they thought he was an ass, reflected and began to suspect that he had been
       bewitched by the woman, especially since he could utter no word, although he understood
       all that was said. And when, on again trying to board the ship, he was driven off with
       heavier blows, he was in bitterness of heart compelled to remain and watch the ship sail
       away. And so, as he ran here and there, since everybody thought he was an ass, he was
       necessarily treated as such. At last, under compulsion, he went back to the woman’s house,
       and to keep himself alive served her at her pleasure for three years, doing no work but to
       bring to the house such necessities as wood and corn, and to carry away what had to be
       carried away like a beast of burden: the only consolation that was left to him being that
       although everyone else took him for an ass, the witches themselves, severally and in
       company, who frequented the house, recognized him as a man, and he could talk and behave
       with them as a man should.
             Now if it is asked how burdens were placed upon him as if he were a beast, we must
       say that this case is analogous to that of which S. Augustine speaks in his De Ciuitate Dei,
       Book XVIII, chapter 17, where he tells of the tavern women who changed their guests into
       beasts of burden; and to that of the father Praestantius, who thought he was a pack-horse and
       carried corn with other animals. For the delusion caused by this glamour was threefold.
             First in its effect on the men who saw the young man not as a man but as an ass; and it
       is shown above in Chapter VIII how devils can easily cause this. Secondly, those burdens
       were no illusion; abut when they were beyond the strength of the young man, the devil
       invisible carried them. Thirdly, that when he was consorting with others, the young man
       himself considered in his imagination and perceptive faculties at least, which are faculties
       belonging to the bodily organs, that he was an ass; but not in his reason: for he as not so
       bound but that he knew himself to be a man, although he was magically deluded into
       imagining himself a beast. Nabuchodonosor provides an example of the same delusion.
             After three years had passed in this way, in the fourth year it happened that the young
       man went one morning into the city, with the woman following a long way behind; and he
       passed by a church where Holy Mass was being celebrated, and heard the sacred-bell ring at
       the elevation of the Host (for in that kingdom the Mass is celebrated according to the Latin,
       and not according to the Greek rite). And he turned towards the church, and, not daring to
       enter for fear of being driven off with blows, knelt down outside by bending the knees of his
       hind legs, and lifted his forelegs, that is, his hands, joined together over his ass’s head, as it
       was thought to be, and looked upon the elevation of the Sacrament. And when some
       Genoese merchants saw this prodigy, they followed the ass in astonishment, discussing this
       marvel among themselves; and behold! the witch came and belaboured the ass with her
       stick. And because, as we have said, this sort of witchcraft is better known in those parts, at
       the instance of the merchants the ass and the witch were taken before the judge; where,
       being questioned and tortured, she confessed her crime and promised to restore the young
       man to his true shape if she might be allowed to return to her house. So she was dismissed


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b04a.html (2 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:03:46 PM]
Part II, Question II, Chapter IV

       and went back to her house, where the young man was restored to his former shape; and
       being again arrested, she paid the debt which her crimes merited. And the young man
       returned joyfully to his own country.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                    Question II, Chapter V

                                                      Main Index


                                                   Part II, Question II, Chapter IV
                                                  was transcribed by Christie Rice.

                         HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                 All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b04a.html (3 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:03:46 PM]
Notes

           “Sacrament.” One of the most famous of the miracles of S. Antony of Padua, wrought for
        the conversion of heretics, was that of a mule, belonging to one Bovidilla, a blasphemer of
        the Sacrament. The animal, although it had been, as agreed, kept fasting for three days,
        refused to turn to a sieve of oats held out by its master, but fell down upon its knees and
        adored the Host which the Saint was carrying in the ostensory. Some narratives of the
        fourteenth century say this happened at Toulouse, and some name Bruges, but the actual
        place Rimini. In the basilica Il Santo, at Padua, this miracle is depicted more than once.
        There is a bronze bas-relief by Donatello in the Chapel of the Sacrament, and a fresco by
        Campagnola. The same subject was painted by Van Dyck for the Recollects at Malines.
           Animals have been known to distinguish Our Lord’s Body in the Host, a fact which, when
        one considers their sense and intelligence, is not at all surprising.
           At the trial of the Satanist Louis Gaufridi it was proved that upon one occasion during
        their accursed rites a dog was led in to devour the consecrated Species, but he stretched out
        his paws in adoration before the Body of Christ and bowed down his head, nor could kicks
        nor blows compel him to stir. Several of the devotees broke down into tears and began
        loudly to bewail their sins, after which it was decreed in future that the Host should be
        defiled, but that no animals must be admitted. See my “Geography of Witchcraft,” pp.
        410-411.
           S. Optatus tells us that certain Donatists once threw the Host to some hungry dogs, who
        suddenly turned on the heretics and tore them to pieces.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2060.html [2002-01-20 12:03:46 PM]
Part II, Question II, Chapter V


                                  THE
                          MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                      PART II, QUESTION II.
                                                          CHAPTER V
                       Prescribed Remedies for those who are Obsessed owing to some Spell.

             We have shown in Chapter X of the preceding Question that sometimes devils, through
       witchcraft, substantially inhabit certain men, and why they do this: namely, that it may be
       for some grave crime of the man himself, and for his own ultimate benefit; or sometimes for
       the slight fault of another man; sometimes for a man's own venial sin; and sometimes for
       another man's grave sin. For any of these reasons a man may in varying degrees be
       possessed by a devil. Nider in his Formicarius states that there is no cause for wonder if
       devils, at the instance of witches and with God's permission, substantially take possession of
       men.
             It is clear also from the details given in that chapter what are the remedies by which
       such men can be liberated; namely, by the exorcisms of the Church; and by true contrition
       and confession, when a man is possessed for some mortal sin. An example is the manner in
       which that Bohemian priest was set free. But there are three other remedies besides, which
       are of virtue; namely, the Holy Communion of the Eucharist, the visitation of shrines and
       the prayers of holy men, and by lifting the sentence of excommunication. Of these we shall
       speak, although they are plainly set out in the discourses of the Doctors, since all have not
       easy access to the necessary treatises.
             Cassian, in his Collation of the Abbots, speaks in these words of the Eucharist: We do
       not remember that our elders ever forbade the administration of the Holy Communion to
       those possessed by evil spirits; it should even be given to them every day if possible. For it
       must be believed that It is of great virtue in the purgation and protection of both soul and
       body; and that when a man receives It, the evil spirit which afflicts his members or lurks
       hidden in them is driven away as if it were burned with fire. And lately we saw the Abbot
       Andronicus healed in this way; and the devil will rage with mad fury when he feels himself
       shut out by the heavenly medicine, and he will try the harder and the oftener to inflict his
       tortures, as he feels himself driven farther off by this spiritual remedy. So says S. John
       Cassian.
             And again he adds: Two things must be steadfastly believed. First, that without the
       permission of God no one is altogether possessed by these spirits. Second, that everything
       which God permits to happen to us, whether it seem to be sorrow or gladness, is sent for out
       good as from a pitying Father and merciful Physician. For the devils are, as it were,
       schoolmasters of humility, so that they who descend from this world may either be purged
       for the eternal life or be sentenced to the pain of their punishment; and such, according to S.
       Paul, are in the present life delivered unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the
       spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus Christ.
             But here there arises a doubt. For S. Paul says: Let a man examine himself, and so eat

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b05a.html (1 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:46 PM]
Part II, Question II, Chapter V

       of the Bread: then how can a man who is possessed communicate, since he has not the use
       of his reason? S. Thomas answers this in his Third Part, Question 80, saying that there are
       distinct degrees in madness. For to say that a man has not the use of his reason may mean
       two things. In one case he has some feeble power of reason; as a man is said to be blind
       when he can nevertheless see imperfectly. And since such men can to some extent join in
       the devotion of this Sacrament, it is not to be denied to them.
             But others are said to be mad because they have been so from birth; and such may not
       partake of the Sacrament, since they are in no way able to engage in devout preparation for
       it.
             Or perhaps they have not always been without the use of their reason; and then, if when
       they were sane they appeared to appreciate the devotion due to the Sacrament, It should be
       administered to them when they are at the point of death, unless it is feared that they may
       vomit or spew It out.
             The following decision is recorded by the Council of Carthage (26, q. 6). When a sick
       man wishes to confess, and if on the arrival of the priest he is rendered dumb by his
       infirmity, or falls into a frenzy, those who have heard him speak must give their testimony.
       And if he is thought to be at the point of death, let him be reconciled with God by the laying
       on of hands and the placing of the Sacrament in his mouth. S. Thomas also says that the
       same procedure may be used with baptized people who are bodily tormented by unclean
       spirits, and with other mentally distracted persons. And he adds, in Book IV, dist. 9, that the
       Communion must not be denied to demoniacs unless it is certain that they are being tortured
       by the devil for some crime. To this Peter of Palude adds: In this case they are to be
       considered as persons to be excommunicated and delivered up to Satan.
             From this it is clear that, even if a man be possessed by a devil for his own crimes, yet
       if he has lucid intervals and, while he has the use of his reason, is contrite and confesses his
       sins, since he is absolved in the sight of God, he must in no way be deprived of the
       Communion of the Divine Sacrament of the Eucharist.
             How those who are possessed may be delivered by the intercessions and prayers of the
       Saints is found in the Legends of the Saints. For by the merits of Saints, Martyrs, Confessors
       and Virgins the unclean spirits are subdued by their prayers in the land where they live, just
       as the Saints in their earthly journey subdued them.
             Likewise we read that the devout prayers of wayfarers have often obtained the
       deliverance of those possessed. And Cassian urges them to pray for them, saying: If we hold
       the opinion or rather faith of which I have written above, that everything is sent by the Lord
       for the good of our souls and the betterment of the universe, we shall in no way despise
       those who are possessed; but we shall incessantly pray for them as for our own selves, and
       pity them with our whole heart.
             As for the last method, that of releasing the sufferer from excommunication, it must be
       known that this is rare, and only lawfully practised by such as have authority and are
       informed by revelation that the man has become possessed on account of the
       excommunication of the Church: such was the case of the Corinthian fornicator (I.
       Corinthians v) who was excommunicated by S. Paul and the Church, and delivered unto
       Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that his spirit might be saved in the day of our Lord
       JESUS Christ; that is, as the gloss says, either for the illumination of grace by contrition or
       for judgement.


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b05a.html (2 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:46 PM]
Part II, Question II, Chapter V

             And he delivered to Satan false teachers who had lost the faith, such as Hymenaeus and
       Alexander, that they might learn not to blaspheme (I. Timothy i). For so great was the power
       and the grace of S. Paul, says the gloss, that by the mere words of his mouth he could
       deliver to Satan those who fell away from the faith.
             S. Thomas (IV. 18) teaches concerning the three effects of excommunication as
       follows. If a man, he says, is deprived of the prayers of the Church, he suffers a threefold
       loss corresponding with the benefits which accrue to one who is in communion with the
       Church. For those who are excommunicated are bereft of the source from which flows an
       increase of grace to those who have it, and a mean to obtain grace for those who have it not;
       and, being deprived of grace, they lose also the power of preserving their uprightness;
       although it must not be thought that they are altogether shut out from God's providence, but
       only from that special providence which watches over the sons of the Church; and they lose
       also a strong source of protection against the Enemy, for greater power is granted to the
       devil to injure such men, both bodily and spiritually.
             For in the primitive Church, when men had to be drawn into the faith by signs, just as
       the Holy Spirit was made manifest by a visible sign, so also a bodily affliction by the devil
       was the visible sign of a man who was excommunicated. And it is not unfitting that a man
       whose case is not quite desperate should be delivered to Satan; for he is not given to the
       devil as one to be damned, but to be corrected, since it is in the power of the Church, when
       she pleases, to deliver him again from the hands of the devil. So says S. Thomas. Therefore
       the lifting of the ban of excommunication, when prudently used by a discreet exorcist, is a
       fitting remedy for those who are possessed.
             But Nider adds that the exorcist must particularly beware of making too presumptive a
       use of his powers, or of mingling any ribaldry or jesting with the serious work of God, or
       adding to it anything that smacks of superstition or witchcraft; for otherwise he will hardly
       escape punishment, as he shows by an example.
             For Blessed Gregory, in his First Dialogue, tells of a certain woman who, against her
       conscience, yielded to her husband's persuasions to take pare in the ceremonies at the vigil
       of the dedication of the Church of S. Sebastian. And because she joined in the Church's
       procession against her conscience, she became possessed and raged publicly. When the
       priest of that church saw this, he took the cloth from the altar and covered her with it; and
       the devil suddenly entered into the priest. And because he had presumed beyond his
       strength, he was constrained by his torments to reveal who he was. So says S. Gregory.
             And to show that no spirit of ribaldry must be allowed to enter into the holy office of
       exorcism, Nider tells that he saw in a monastery at Cologne a brother who was given to
       speaking jestingly, but was a very famous expeller of devils. This man was casting a devil
       out of a man possessed in the monastery, and the devil asked him to give him some place to
       which he could go. This pleased the Brother, and he jokingly said, “Go to my privy.” So the
       devil went out; and when in the night the Brother wished to go and purge his belly, the devil
       attacked him so savagely in the privy that he with difficulty escaped with his life.
             But especial care is to be taken that those who are obsessed through witchcraft should
       not be induced to go to witches to be healed. For S. Gregory goes on to say of the woman
       we have just mentioned: Her kindred and those who loved her in the flesh took her to some
       witches to be healed, by whom she was taken to a river and dipped in the water with many
       incantation; and upon this she was violently shaken, and instead of one devil being cast out,


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b05a.html (3 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:46 PM]
Part II, Question II, Chapter V

       a legion entered into her, and she began to cry out in their several voices. Therefore her
       kindred confessed what they had done, and in great grief brought her to the holy Bishop
       Fortunatus, who by daily prayers and fasting entirely restored her to health.
              But since it has been said that exorcists must beware lest they make use of anything
       savouring of superstition or witchcraft, some exorcist may doubt whether it is lawful to use
       certain unconsecrated herbs and stones. In answer we say that it is so much the better if the
       herbs are consecrated; but that if they are not, then it is not superstitious to use a certain herb
       called Demonifuge, or even the natural properties of stones. But he must not think that he is
       casting out devils by the power of these; for then he would fall into the error of believing
       that he could use other herbs and incantations in the same way; and this is the error of
       necromancers, who think that they can perform this kind of work through the natural and
       unknown virtues of such objects.
              Therefore S. Thomas says, Book IV. dist. 7, art. the last: It must not be any corporeal
       powers; and therefore they are not to be influenced by invocations or any acts of sorcery,
       except in so far as they have entered into a pact with a witch. Of this Esaias (xxviii) speaks:
       We have made a covenant with death, and with hell are we at agreement. And he thus
       explains the passage in Job xli: Canst thou draw out Leviathan with an hook? and the
       following words. For he says: If one rightly considers all that has been said before, it will
       seem that it belongs to the heretical presumption of necromancers when anyone tries to
       make an agreement with devils, or to subject them in any way to his own will.
              Having, then, shown that man cannot of his own power overcome the devil, he
       concludes by saying: Place your hand upon him; but understand that, if you have any power,
       it is yet by Divine virtue that he is overcome. And he adds: Remember the battle which I
       wage against him; that is to say, the present being put for the future, I shall fight against him
       on the Cross, where Leviathan will be taken with an hook, that is, by the divinity hidden
       under the bait of humanity, since he will think our Saviour to be only a man. And afterwards
       it says: There is no power on earth to be compared with him: by which it is meant that no
       bodily power can equal the power of the devil, which is a purely spiritual power. So says S.
       Thomas.
              But a man possessed by a devil can indirectly be relieved by the power of music, as
       was Saul by David's harp, or of a herb, or of any other bodily matter in which there lies
       some natural virtue. Therefore such remedies may be used, as can be argued both from
       authority and by reason. For S. Thomas, XXVI. 7, says that stones and herbs may be used
       for the relief of a man possessed by a devil. And there are the words of S. Jerome.
              And as for the passage in Tobias, where the Angel says: Touching the heart and the
       liver (which you took from the fish), if a devil or an evil spirit trouble any, we must make a
       smoke thereof before the man or the woman, and the party shall be no more vexed; S.
       Thomas says: We ought not to marvel at this, for the smoke of a certain tree when it is
       burned seems to have the same virtue, as if it has in it some spiritual sense, or power of
       spiritual prayer for the future.
              Of the same opinion are Blessed Albert, in his commentary on S. Luke ix, and Nicolas
       of Lyra and Paul of Burgos, on I. Samuel xvi. The last-named homilist comes to this
       conclusion: that it must be allowed that those possessed by a devil can not only be relieved,
       but even entirely delivered by means of material things, understanding that in the latter case
       they are not very fiercely molested. And he proves this by reasoning as follows: Devils


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b05a.html (4 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:46 PM]
Part II, Question II, Chapter V

       cannot alter corporeal matter just at their will, but only by bringing together complementary
       active and passive agents, as Nicolas says. In the same way some material object can cause
       in the human body a disposition which makes it susceptible to the operations of the devil.
       For example, according to physicians, mania very much predisposes a man to dementia, and
       consequently to demoniac obsession: therefore if, in such a case, the predisposing passive
       agent be remove, it will follow that the active affliction of the devil will be cured.
             In this light we may consider the fish's liver; and the music of David, by which Saul
       was at first relieved and then entirely delivered of the evil spirit; for it says: And the evil
       spirit departed from him. But it is not consonant with the meaning of the Scripture to say
       that this was done by the merits or prayers of David; for the Scripture says nothing of any
       such matter, whereas it would have spoken notably in his praise if this had been so. This
       reasoning we take fro Paul of Burgos. There is also the reason which we gave in Question V
       of the First Part: that Saul was liberated because by the harp was prefigured the virtue of the
       Cross on which were stretched the Sacred Limbs of Christ's Body. And more is written there
       which may be considered together with the present inquiry. But we shall only conclude by
       saying that the use of material things in lawful exorcisms is not superstitious. And now it is
       expedient that we should speak about the exorcisms themselves.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                   Question II, Chapter VI

                                                      Main Index


                                                  Part II, Question II, Chapter V
                                               was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b05a.html (5 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:46 PM]
Notes

           “Every day.” Since the Sacrament is “medicina animae”. In “En Route,” Chap. V, the
        Abbé Gévresin says: “Je comprends très bien le système du père Milleriot qui forçait à
        communier des gens qu’il appréhendait de voir retomber dans leus péchés, aprè. Pour toute
        pénitence, il les obligeait à recommunier encore et il finissait par les épurer avec les Saintes
        Espèces prises à de hautes doses. C’est une doctrine tout à la fois réaliste et surélevée.”
        Pére Milleriot, S.J., was largely concerned in the conversion (1879-80) if
        Paul-Maximilien-Emile Littré, who died at Paris, 2 June, 1881.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2061.html [2002-01-20 12:03:47 PM]
Notes

           “Carthage.” The earliest Council of Carthage of which we know was held about A.D.
        198, when seventy bishops, presided over by the Bishop of Carthage, Agrippinus, were
        present. After this date more than twenty Councils were held at Carthage, of which the most
        important were those under S. Cyprian, relative to the “lapsi,” Novatianism, and the
        re-baptism of heretics, and the synods of 412, 416 and 418 which condemned the doctrines
        of Pelagius.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2062.html [2002-01-20 12:03:47 PM]
Notes

           “Ribaldry.” A rubric of the “De exorcizandis Obsessis a Daemonio” prescribes:
        “Necessarie uero interrogationes sunt, ut de tempore quo ingressi sunt, de cause, et aliis
        huiusmodi. Ceteras autem daemoniis nugas, risus, et ineptias Exorcista cohibeat, aut
        contemnat, et circumstantes, qui pauci esse debent, admoneat, ne haec curent, neque ipsi
        interrogent obsessum: sed potius humiliter et enixe Deum pro eo precantur.”




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2063.html [2002-01-20 12:03:47 PM]
Notes

           “Fortunatus.” Bishop of Naples, who was apointed to that see by S. Gregory the Great in
        593 upon the deposition of Demetrius.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2064.html [2002-01-20 12:03:47 PM]
Notes

            “Fasting.” “S. Matthew” xvii, 20: Hoc autem genus non eiicitur nisi per orationem et
        ieiunium.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2065.html [2002-01-20 12:03:48 PM]
Notes

          “Demonifuge.” See Sinistrari, “De Daemonialitate,” LXVIII, in my translation
        “Demoniality,” pp. 52-53.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2066.html [2002-01-20 12:03:48 PM]
Notes

           “Paul of Burgos.” Paul de Santa Maria, a Spanish Archbishop, Lord Chancellor, and
        exegete, born at Burgos about 1351; died 29 August, 1435. The most wealthy and influential
        Jew of Burgos (Jewish name Solomon-Ha-Levi), and a scholar of the firs rank in Talmudic
        and Rabbinical literature, a Rabbi of the Hebraic community, he was converted to
        Christianity by the irrefutable logic of the “Summa” of S. Thomas. He received baptism 21
        July, 1390. His reputation as a Biblical writer chiefly rests upon his “Additiones” to the
        “Postilla” of Nicolas of Lyra, Nuremberg, 1481; Venice, 1481; and many other editions.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2067.html [2002-01-20 12:03:48 PM]
Part II, Question II, Chapter VI


                                  THE
                          MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                      PART II, QUESTION II.
                                                         CHAPTER VI
Prescribed Remedies; to wit, the Lawful Exorcisms of the Church, for all Sorts of Infirmities and Ills due
               to Witchcraft; and the Method of Exorcising those who are Bewitched.

             It has already been stated that witches can afflict men with every kind of physical
       infirmity; therefore it can be taken as a general rule that the various verbal or practical
       remedies which can be applied in the case of those infirmities which we have just been
       discussing are equally applicable to all other infirmities, such as epilepsy or leprosy, for
       example. And as lawful exorcisms are reckoned among the verbal remedies and have been
       most often considered by us, they may be taken as a general type of such remedies; and
       there are three matters to be considered regarding them.
             First, we must judge whether a person who has not been ordained as an exorcist, such
       as a layman or a secular cleric, may lawfully exorcise devils and their works. Bound up with
       this question are three others: namely; first, what constitutes the legality of this practice;
       secondly, the seven conditions which must be observed when one wishes to make private
       use of charms and benedictions; and thirdly, in what way the disease is to be exorcised and
       the devil conjured.
             Secondly, we must consider what is to be done when no healing grace results from the
       exorcism.
             Thirdly, we must consider practical and not verbal remedies; together with the solution
       of certain arguments.
             For the first, we have the opinion of S. Thomas in Book IV, dist. 23. He says: When a
       man is ordained as an exorcist, or into any of the other minor Orders, he has conferred upon
       him the power of exorcism in his official capacity; and this power may even lawfully be
       used by those who belong to no Order, but such do not exercise it in their official capacity.
       Similarly the Mass can be said in an unconsecrated house, although the very purpose of
       consecrating a church is that the Mass may be said there; but this is more on account of the
       grace which is in the righteous than of the grace of the Sacrament.
             From these words we may conclude that, although it is good that in the liberation of a
       bewitched person recourse should be had to an exorcist having authority to exorcise such
       bewitchments, yet at times other devout persons may, either with or without any exorcism,
       cast out this sort of diseases.
             For we hear of a certain poor and very devout virgin, one of whose friends has been
       grievously bewitched in his foot, so that it was clear to the physicians that he could be cured
       by no medicines. But it happened that the virgin went to visit the sick man, and he at once
       begged her to apply some benediction to his foot. She consented, and did no more than
       silently say the Lord's Prayer and the Apostles' Creed, at the same time making use of the
       sign of the life-giving Cross. The sick man then felt himself at once cured, and, that he

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b06a.html (1 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:49 PM]
Part II, Question II, Chapter VI

       might have a remedy for the future, asked the virgin what charms she had used. But she
       answered: You are of little faith and do not hold to the holy and lawful practices of the
       Church, and you often apply forbidden charms and remedies for your infirmities; therefore
       you are rarely healthy in your body, because you are always sick in your soul. But if you
       would put your trust in prayer and in the efficacy of lawful symbols, you will often be very
       easily cured. For I did nothing but repeat the Lord's Prayer and the Apostles' Creed, and you
       are now cured.
             This example gives rise to the question, whether there is not any efficacy in other
       benedictions and charms, and even conjurations by way of exorcism; for they seem to be
       condemned in this story. We answer that the virgin condemned only unlawful charms and
       unlawful conjurations and exorcisms.
             To understand these last we must consider how they originated, and how they came to
       be abused. For they were in their origin entirely sacred; but just as by the means of devils
       and wicked men all things can be defiled, so also were these sacred words. For it is said in
       the last chapter of S. Mark, of the Apostles and holy men: In My Name shall they cast out
       devils; and they visited the sick, and prayed over them with sacred words; and in after times
       priests devoutly used similar rites; and therefore there are to be found to-day in ancient
       Churches devout prayers and holy exorcisms which men can use or undergo, when they are
       applied by pious men as they used to be, without any superstition; even as there are now to
       be found learned men and Doctors of holy Theology who visit the sick and use such words
       for the healing not only of demoniacs, but of other diseases as well.
             But, alas! superstitious men have, on the pattern of these, found for themselves many
       vain and unlawful remedies which they employ these days for sick men and animals; and the
       clergy have become too slothful to use any more the lawful words when they visit the sick.
       On this account Gulielmus Durandus, the commentator on S. Raymond, says that such
       lawful exorcisms may be used by a religious and discreet priest, or by a layman, or even by
       a woman of good life and proved discretion; by the offering of lawful prayers over the sick:
       not over fruits or animals, but over the sick. For the Gospel says: They shall place their
       hands upon the sick, etc. And such persons are not to be prevented from practising in this
       way; unless perhaps it is feared that, following their example, other indiscreet and
       superstitious persons should make improper use of incantations. It is these superstitious
       diviners whom that virgin we have mentioned condemned, when she said that they who
       consulted with such had weak, that is to say bad, faith.
             Now for the elucidation of this matter it is asked how it is possible to know whether the
       words of such charms and benedictions are lawful or superstitious, and how they ought to be
       used; and whether the devil can be conjured and diseases exorcised.
             In the first place, that is said to be lawful in the Christian religion which is not
       superstitious; and that is said to be superstitious which is over and above the prescribed form
       of religion. See Colossians ii: which things indeed have a show of wisdom in superstition:
       on which the gloss says: Superstition is undisciplined religion, that is, religion observed with
       defective methods in evil circumstance.
             Anything, also, is superstition which human tradition without higher authority has
       caused to usurp the name of religion; such is the interpolation of hymns at Holy Mass, the
       alteration of the Preface for Requiems, the abbreviation of the Creed which it to be sung at
       Mass, the reliance upon an organ rather than upon the choir for the music, neglect to have a


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b06a.html (2 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:49 PM]
Part II, Question II, Chapter VI

       Server on the Altar, and such practices. But to return to our point, when a work is done by
       virtue of the Christian religion, as when someone wishes to heal the sick by means of prayer
       and benediction and sacred words, which is the matter we are considering), such a person
       must observe seven conditions by which such benedictions are rendered lawful. And even if
       he uses adjurations, through the virtue of the Divine Name, and by the virtue of the works of
       Christ, His Birth, Passion and Precious Death, by which the devil was conquered and cast
       out; such benedictions and charms and exorcisms shall be called lawful, and they who
       practise them are exorcists or lawful enchanters. See S. Isidore, Etym. VIII, Enchanters are
       they whose art and skill lies in the use of words.
             And the first of these conditions, as we learn from S. Thomas, is that there must be
       nothing in the words which hints at any expressed or tacit invocation of devils. If such were
       expressed, it would be obviously unlawful. If it were tacit, it might be considered in the light
       of intention, or in that of fact: in that of intention, when the operator has no care whether it
       is God or the devil who is helping him, so long as he attains his desired result; in that of fact,
       when a person has no natural aptitude for such work, but creates some artificial means. And
       of such not only must physicians and astronomers be the judges, but especially Theologians.
       For in this way do necromancers work, making images and rings and stones by artificial
       means; which have no natural virtue to effect the results which they very often expect:
       therefore the devil must be concerned in their works.
             Secondly, the benedictions or charms must contain no unknown names; for according
       to S. John Chrysostom such are to be regarded with fear, lest they should conceal some
       matter of superstition.
             Thirdly, there must be nothing in the words that is untrue; for if there is, the effect of
       them cannot be from God, Who is not a witness to a lie. But some old women in their
       incantations use some such jingling doggerel as the following:
       Blessed MARY went a-walking
       Over Jordan river.
       Stephen met her, and fell a-talking, etc.
              Fourthly, there must be no vanities, or written characters beyond the sign of the Cross.
       Therefore the charms which soldiers are wont to carry are condemned.
              Fifthly, no faith must be placed in the method of writing or reading or binding the
       charm about a person, or in any such vanity, which has nothing to do with the reverence of
       God, without which a charm is altogether superstitious.
              Sixthly, in the citing and uttering of Divine words and of Holy Scripture attention must
       only be paid to the sacred words themselves and their meaning, and to the reverence of God;
       whether the effect be looked for from the Divine virtue, or from the relics of Saints, which
       are a secondary power, since their virtue springs originally from God.
              Seventhly, the looked-for effect must be left tot he Divine Will; for He knows whether
       it is best for a man to be healed or to be plagued, or to die. This condition was set down by
       S. Thomas.
              So we may conclude that if none of these conditions be broken, the incantation will be
       lawful. And S. Thomas writes in this connexion on the last chapter of S. Mark: And these
       signs shall follow them that believe; in my name shall they cast out devils; they shall take up
       serpents. From this it is clear that, provided the above conditions are observed, it is lawful


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b06a.html (3 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:49 PM]
Part II, Question II, Chapter VI

       by means of sacred words to keep serpents away.
             S. Thomas says further: The words of God are not less holy than the Relics of the
       Saints. As S. Augustine says: The word of God is not less than the Body of Christ. But all
       are agreed that it is lawful to carry reverently about the person the Relics of the Saints:
       therefore let us by all means invoke the name of God by duly using the Lord's Prayer and
       the Angelic Salutation, by His Birth and Passion, by His Five Wounds, and by the Seven
       Words which He spoke on the Cross, by the Triumphant Inscription, by the three nails, and
       by the other weapons of Christ's army against the devil and his works. By all these means it
       is lawful to work, and our trust may be placed in them, leaving the issue to God's will.
             And what has been said about the keeping off of serpents applies also to other animals,
       provided that the attention is fixed only on the sacred words and the Divine virtue. But great
       care is to be used in incantations of this nature. For S. Thomas says: Such diviners often use
       unlawful observances, and obtain magic effects by means of devils, especially in the case of
       serpents; for the serpent was the devil's first instrument by which he deceived mankind.
             For in the town of Salzburg there was a certain mage who one day, in open view of all,
       wanted to charm all the snakes into a particular pit, and kill them all within an area of a
       mile. So he gathered all the snakes together, and was himself standing over the pit, when last
       of all there came a huge and horrible serpent which would not go into the pit. This serpent
       kept making signs to the man to let it go away and crawl where it would; but he would not
       cease from his incantation, but insisted that, as all the other snakes had entered the pit and
       there died, so also must this horrible serpent. But it stood on the opposite side to the
       warlock, and suddenly leapt over the pit and fell upon the man, wrapping itself round his
       belly, and dragged him with itself into the pit, where they both died. From this it may be
       seen that only for a useful purpose, such as driving them away from men's houses, are such
       incantations to be practised, and they are to be done by the Divine virtue, and in the fear of
       God, and with reverence.
             In the second place we have to consider how exorcisms or charms of this kind ought to
       be used, and whether they should be worn round the neck or sewn into the clothing. It may
       seem that such practices are unlawful; for S. Augustine says, in the Second Book on the
       Christian Doctrine: There are a thousand magic devices and amulets and charms which are
       all superstitious, and the School of Medicine utterly condemns them all, whether they are
       incantations, or certain marks which are called characters, or engraved charms to be hung
       round the neck.
             Also S. John Chrysostom, commenting on S. Matthew, says: Some persons wear round
       their neck some written portion of the Gospel; but is not the Gospel every day read in the
       church and heard by all? How then shall a man be helped by wearing the Gospel round his
       neck, when he has reaped no benefit from hearing it with his ears? For in what does the
       virtue of the Gospel consist; in the characters of its letters, or in the meaning of its words? If
       in the characters, you do well to hang it round your neck; but if in the meaning, surely it is
       of more benefit when planted in the heart than when worn round the neck.
                                                                 Page 1 of 3




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b06a.html (4 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:49 PM]
Part II, Question II, Chapter VI

                                    Question II, Chapter VI Continued . . . .

                                                      Main Index


                                                   Part II, Question II, Chapter VI
                                                  was transcribed by Christie Rice.

                         HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                 All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b06a.html (5 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:49 PM]
Notes

            “Durandus.” William Duranti, canonist and one of the most important mediaeval
        liturgical writers, born about 1237 at Puimisson, Provence; died at Rome 1 November,
        1296. His career was most noble and distinguished. A long epitaph upon his monument in
        Santa Maria sopra Minerva tells the story of his life and gives a list of his works. The most
        important of these is the “Rationale diuinorum officiorum,” the first edition of which by
        Fust and Schoeffer as issued at Mainz in 1459. It has been frequently reprinted, the last
        complete edition being Naples, 1839. The “Speculum Iudiciale” and the “Commentarius in
        canones Concilii Lugdunensis II” are valuable treatises upon the canons and canonical
        processes.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2068.html [2002-01-20 12:03:49 PM]
Part II, Question II, Chapter VI


                                  THE
                          MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                    PART II, QUESTION II.
                                                   CHAPTER VI CONTINUED

             But, on the other hand, the Doctors answer as follows, especially S. Thomas where he
       asks whether it is unlawful to hang sacred words round the neck. Their opinion is that, in all
       charms and writings so worn, there are two things to be avoided.
             First, in whatever is written there must be nothing that savours of an invocation of
       devils; for then it is manifestly superstitious and unlawful, and must be judged as an
       apostasy from the faith, as has often been said before.
             Similarly, in accordance with the above seven conditions, it must not contain any
       unknown names. But if these two snares be avoided, it is lawful both to place such charms
       on the lips of the sick, and for the sick to carry them with them. But the Doctors condemn
       their use in one respect, that is, when a man pays greater attention to and has more reliance
       upon the mere signs of the written letters than upon their meaning.
             It may be said that a layman who does not understand the words cannot pay any
       attention to their meaning. But it is enough if such a man fixes his thoughts on the Divine
       virtue, and leaves it to the Divine will to do what seems good to His mercy.
             In the third place we have to consider whether the devil is to be conjured and the
       disease exorcised at the same time, or whether a different order should be observed, or
       whether one of these operations can take place without the other. Here there are several
       points to be considered. First, whether the devil is always present when the sick man is
       afflicted. Second, what sort of things are capable of being exorcised or remedied. Third, the
       method of exorcising.
             For the first point, it would seem, following that pronouncement of S. John Damascene
       that where the devil operates there he is, that the devil is always present in the sick man
       when he afflicts him. Also in the history of S. Bartholomew it seems that a man is only
       delivered from the devil when he is cured of his sickness.
             But this can be answered as follows. When it is said that the devil is present in a sick
       man, this can be understood in two ways: either that he is personally present, or that he is
       present in the effect which he has caused. In the first sense he is present when he first causes
       the sickness; in the second sense he is said to be present not personally but in the effect. In
       this way, when the Doctors ask whether the devil substantially inhabits a man who commits
       mortal sin, they say that he is not personally present, but only in effect; just as a master is
       said to dwell in his servants in respect of his mastership. But the case is quite otherwise with
       men who are possessed by a devil.
             For the second point, as to what sort of things can be exorcised, the opinion of S.
       Thomas, Book IV, dist. 6, should be noted, where he says that on account of man's sin the
       devil receives power over a man and over everything which a man uses, to hurt him with
       them; and since there can be no compromise of Christ with Belial, therefore whenever


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b06b.html (1 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:50 PM]
Part II, Question II, Chapter VI

       anything is to be sanctified for Divine worship, it is first exorcised that it may be
       consecrated to God freed from the power of the devil, by which it might be turned to the
       hurt of men. This is shown in the blessing of water, the consecration of a church, and in all
       matters of this sort. Therefore, since the first act of reconciliation by which a man is
       consecrated to God is in baptism, it is necessary that man should be exorcised before he is
       baptized; indeed in this it is more imperative than in any other circumstance. For in man
       himself lies the cause by reason of which the devil receives his power in other matters which
       are brought about by man, namely, sin, either original or actual. This then is the significance
       of the words that are used in exorcism, as when it is said, “Depart, O Satan, from him”; and
       likewise of the things that are then done.
             To return, then, to the actual point. When it is asked whether the disease is to be
       exorcised and the devil abjured, and which of these should be done first; it is answered that
       not the disease, but the sick and bewitched man himself is exorcised: just as in the case of a
       child, it is not the infection of the fomes which is exorcised, but the child itself. Also, just as
       the child is first exorcised, and then the devil is abjured to depart; so also is the bewitched
       person first exorcised, and afterwards the devil and his works are bidden to depart. Again,
       just as salt and water are exorcised, so are all things which can be used by the sick man, so
       that it is expedient to exorcise and bless chiefly his food and drink. In the case of baptism
       the following ceremony of exorcism is observed: the exsufflation towards the West and the
       renunciation of the devil; secondly, the raising of the hands with a solemn confession of the
       faith of the Christian religion; thirdly, prayer, benediction, and the laying on of hands;
       fourthly, the stripping and anointing with Holy Oil; and after baptism, the communion and
       the putting on of the chrisom, he is to remain bound naked to a Holy Candle of the length of
       Christ's body or of the Cross. And then may be said the following:
            I exorcise thee, Peter, or thee, Barbara, being weak but reborn in Holy Baptism, by the
       living God, by the true God, by God Who redeemed thee with His Precious Blood, that thou
       mayest be exorcised, that all the illusions and wickedness of the devil's deceits may depart
       and flee from thee together with every unclean spirit, adjured by Him Who will come to
       judge both the quick and the dead, and who will purge the earth with fire. Amen.
             Let us pray.
             O God of mercy and pity, Who according to Thy tender lovingkindness chastenest
       those whom Thou dost cherish, and dost gently compel those whom Thou receivest to turn
       their hearts, we invoke Thee, O Lord, that Thou wilt vouchsafe to bestow Thy grace upon
       Thy servant who suffereth from a weakness in the limbs of his body, that whatever is
       corrupt by earthly frailty, whatever is made violate by the deceit of the devil, may find
       redemption in the unity of the body of the Church. Have mercy, O Lord, on his groaning,
       have mercy upon his tears; and as he putteth his trust only in Thy mercy, receive him in the
       sacrament of Thy reconciliation, through Jesus Christ Our Lord. Amen.
             Therefore, accursed devil, hear thy doom, and give honour to the true and living God,
       give honour to the Lord Jesus Christ, that thou depart with thy works from this servant
       whom our Lord Jesus Christ hath redeemed with His Precious Blood.
             Then let him exorcise him a second and yet a third time, with the prayers as above.
              Let us pray.
              God, Who dost ever mercifully govern all things that Thou hast made, incline Thine ear

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b06b.html (2 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:50 PM]
Part II, Question II, Chapter VI

       to our prayers, and look in mercy upon Thy servant labouring under the sickness of the
       body; visit him, and grant him Thy salvation and the healing virtue of Thy heavenly grace,
       through Christ our Lord. Amen.
            Therefore, accursed devil, etc.
            The prayer for the third exorcism.
            O God, the only protection of human frailty, show forth the mighty power of Thy
       strong aid upon our sick brother (or sister), that being holpen by Thy mercy he (she) may be
       worthy to enter Thy Holy Church in safety, through Christ our Lord. Amen.
             And let the exorcist continually sprinkle him with Holy Water. And note that this
       method is recommended, not because it must be rigidly observed, or that other exorcisms
       are not of greater efficacy, but that there should be some regular system of exorcism and
       adjuration. For in the old histories and books of the Church there are sometimes found more
       devout and powerful exorcisms; but since before all things the reverence of God is
       necessary, let each proceed in this matter as he finds it best.
             In conclusion, and for the sake of clearness, we may recommend this form of exorcism
       for a person who is bewitched. Let him first make a good confession (according to the
       often-quoted Canon: If by sortilege, etc.). Then let a diligent search be made in all corners
       and in the beds and mattresses and under the threshold of the door, in case some instrument
       of witchcraft may be found. The bodies of animals bewitched to death are at once to be
       burned. And it is expedient that all bed-clothes and garments should be renewed, and even
       that he should change his house and dwelling. But in case nothing is found, then he who is
       to be exorcised should if possible go into the church in the morning, especially on the Holier
       Days, such as the Feast of Our Lady, or on some Vigil; and the better if the priest also has
       confessed and is in a state of grace, for then the stronger will he be. And let him who is to be
       exorcised hold in his hand a Holy Candle as well as he can, either sitting or kneeling; and let
       those who are present offer up devout prayers for his deliverance. And let him begin the
       Litany at “Our help is in the Name of the Lord,” and let one be appointed to make the
       responses: let him sprinkle him with Holy Water, and place a stole round his neck, and
       recite the Psalm “Haste thee, O God, to deliver me”; and let him continue the Litany for the
       Sick, saying at the Invocation of the Saints, “Pray for him and be favourable; deliver him, O
       Lord,” continuing thus to the end. But where the prayers are to be said, then in the place of
       the prayers let him begin the exorcism, and continue in the way we have declared, or in any
       other better way, as seems good to him. And this sort of exorcism may be continued at least
       three times a week, that so through many intercessions the grace of health may be obtained.
             Finally, he must receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist; although some think that this
       should be done before the exorcism. And at his confession the confessor must inquire
       whether he is under any bond of excommunication, and if he is, whether he has rashly
       omitted to obtain absolution from his Judge; for then, although he may at his discretion
       absolve him, yet when he has regained his health, he must seek absolution also from the
       Judge who excommunicated him.
             It should further be noted that, when the exorcist is not ordained to the Order of
       Exorcist, then he may proceed with prayers; and if he can read the Scriptures, let him read
       the beginnings of the four Gospels of the Evangelists, and the Gospel beginning, “There was
       an Angel sent”; and the Passion of our Lord; all of which have great power to expel the


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b06b.html (3 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:50 PM]
Part II, Question II, Chapter VI

       works of the devil. Also let the Gospel of S. John, “In the beginning was the Word,” be
       written and hung round the sick man's neck, and so let the grace of healing be looked for
       from God.
             But if anyone asks what is the difference between the aspersion of Holy Water and
       exorcism, since both are ordained against the plagues of the devil, the answer is supplied by
       S. Thomas, who says: The devil attacks us from without and from within. Therefore Holy
       Water is ordained against his attacks from without; but exorcism against those from within.
       For this reason those for whom exorcism is necessary are called Energoumenoi, from En,
       meaning In, and Ergon, meaning Work, since they labour within themselves. But in
       exorcising a bewitched person both methods are to be used, because he is tormented both
       within and without.
             Our second main consideration is what is to be done when no healing grace results
       from exorcisms. Now this may happen for six reasons; and there is a seventh about which
       we suspend any definite judgement. For when a person is not healed, it is due either to want
       of faith in the bystanders or in those who present the sick man, or to the sins of them who
       suffer from the bewitchment, or to a neglect of the due and fitting remedies, or to some flaw
       in the faith of the exorcist, or to the lack of a greater trust in the powers of another exorcist,
       or to the need of purgation and for the increased merit of the bewitched person.
             Concerning the first four of these the Gospel teaches us in the incident of the only son
       of his father, who was a lunatic, and of the disciples of Christ being there present (S.
       Matthew xvii. And S. Mark ix.). For in the first place He said that the multitude were
       without faith; whereupon the father prayed Him, saying: Lord, I believe: help Thou mine
       unbelief. And JESUS said to the multitude: O faithless and perverse generation, how long
       shall I be with you?
             Secondly, with regard to him who endured the devil, JESUS rebuked him, that is, the
       son; for, as Saint Jerome says, he had been tormented by the devil because of his sins.
             Thirdly, this illustrates the neglect of the rightful remedies, because good and perfect
       men were not at first present. For S. John Chrysostom says: The pillars of faith, namely,
       Peter and James and John, were not present, for they were at the Transfiguration of Christ:
       neither were there prayer and fasting, without which Christ said that this sort of devil goeth
       not out. Therefore Origen, writing on this passage, says: If at any time a man be not cured
       after prayer, let us not wonder or ask questions or speak, as if the unclean spirit were
       listening to us; but let us cast out our evil spirits by prayer and fasting. And the gloss says:
       This sort of devil, that is, the variability of carnal desires induced by that spirit, is not
       conquered except by strengthening the soul with prayer, and subduing the flesh with fasting.
                                                                 Page 2 of 3


                                    Question II, Chapter VI Continued . . . .

                                                      Main Index


                                                    Part II, Question II, Chapter VI


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b06b.html (4 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:50 PM]
Part II, Question II, Chapter VI

                                                  was transcribed by Christie Rice.

                         HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                 All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b06b.html (5 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:50 PM]
Part II, Question II, Chapter VI


                                  THE
                          MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                    PART II, QUESTION II.
                                                   CHAPTER VI CONTINUED

             Fourthly, the flaw in the faith of the exorcist is exemplified in the disciples of Christ
       who were present. For when they afterwards asked Him privately the cause of their failure,
       He answered: Because of your unbelief: for verily I say unto you, If ye have faith as a grain
       of mustard seed, ye shall say unto this mountain, Remove hence, etc. And S. Hilary says:
       The Apostles believed indeed, but they were not yet perfect in faith: for while the Lord was
       away in the mountain with the other three, and they remained with the multitude, their faith
       became lukewarm.
             The fifth reason is illustrated in the Lives of the Fathers, where we read that certain
       possessed persons could not be delivered by S. Antony, but were delivered by his disciple,
       Paul.
             The sixth reason has already been made clear; for not always when a man is freed from
       sin is he also freed from punishment, but sometimes the penalty remains as a punishment
       and atonement for the previous sin.
             There is yet another remedy by which many have been said to be delivered, namely, the
       re-baptizing of those who are bewitched; but this is a matter on which, as we have said, we
       can make no definite pronouncement. Nevertheless it is most true that when a person has not
       been duly exorcised before baptism, the devil, with God's permission, has always more
       power against such a person. And it is clearly shown without any doubt in what has just
       been written, that much negligence is committed by improperly instructed priests (in which
       case it pertains to the fourth of the above-noted impediments, namely, a flaw in the
       exorcist), or else by old women who do not observe the proper method of baptism at the
       necessary time.
             However, God forbid that I should maintain that the Sacraments cannot be
       administered by wicked men, or that when baptism is performed by a wicked man it is not
       valid, provided that he observes the proper forms and words. Similarly in the exorcism let
       him proceed with due care, not timidly and not rashly. And let no one meddle with such
       sacred offices by any accidental or habitual omission of any necessary forms or words; for
       there are four matters to be observed in the right performance of exorcism, namely, the
       matter, the form, the intention and the order, as we have set them out above; and when one
       of these is lacking it cannot be complete.
             And it is not valid to object that in the primitive Church persons were baptized without
       exorcism, and that even now a person is truly baptized without any exorcism; for in that case
       S. Gregory would have instituted exorcism in vain, and the Church would be in error in its
       ceremonies. Therefore I have not dared altogether to condemn the re-baptism under certain
       conditions of bewitched persons, that they may recover that which was at first omitted.
             It is said, also, of those who walk in their sleep during the night over high buildings


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b06c.html (1 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:51 PM]
Part II, Question II, Chapter VI

       without any harm, that it is the work of evil spirits who thus lead them; and many affirm that
       when such people are re-baptized they are much benefited. And it is wonderful that, when
       they are called by their own names, they suddenly fall back to earth, as if that name had not
       been given to them in proper form at their baptism.
             Let the reader pay attention to those six impediments mentioned above, although they
       refer to Energoumenoi, or men possessed, rather than to men bewitched; for though equal
       virtue is required in both cases, yet it may be said that it is more difficult to cure a bewitched
       person than one possessed. Therefore those impediments apply even more pertinently to the
       case of those who are bewitched; as is proved by the following reasoning.
             It was shown in Chapter X of the First Question of the Second Part that some men are
       at times possessed for no sin of their own, but for the venial sin of another man, and for
       various other causes. But in witchcraft, when adults are bewitched, it generally happens to
       them that the devil grievously possesses them from within for the destruction of their souls.
       Therefore the labour required in the case of the bewitched is twofold, whereas it is only
       single in the case of the possessed. Of this most grievous possession John Cassian speaks in
       his Collation of the Abbot Serenus: They are truly to be judged unhappy and miserable who,
       although they pollute themselves with every crime and wickedness, yet show no outward
       sign of being filled with the devil, nor does there seem to be any temptation commensurate
       with their deeds, nor any punishment sufficient to restrain them. For they do not deserve
       even the healing medicine of purgatory, who in their hardness of heart and impenitence are
       beyond the reach of any earthly correction, and lay up to themselves anger and vengeance in
       that day of wrath and revelation of the Just Judgement, when their worm shall not die.
             And a little earlier, comparing the possession of the body with the binding of the soul
       in sin, he says: Far more grievous and violent is the torment of those who show no sign of
       being bodily possessed by devils, but are most terribly possessed in their souls, being fast
       bound by their sins and vices. For according to the Apostle, a man becomes the slave of him
       by whom he is conquered. And in this respect their case is the most desperate, since they are
       the servants of devils, and can neither resist nor tolerate that domination. It is clear then that,
       not they who are possessed by the devil from without, but they who are bewitched in their
       bodies and possessed from within to the perdition of their souls, are, by reason of many
       impediments, the more difficult to heal.
             Our third main consideration is that of curative charms, and it is to be noted that these
       are of two sorts. They are either quite lawful and free from suspicion, or they are to be
       suspected and are not altogether lawful. We have dealt with the first sort in Chapter V,
       towards the end, where we disposed of a doubt as to the legality of using herbs and stones to
       drive away a bewitchment.
             Now we must treat the second sort which are under suspicion of not being altogether
       lawful; and we must draw attention to what was said in the Introduction to the Second
       Question of the Second Part of this work as to the four remedies, of which three are judged
       to be unlawful, and the fourth not altogether so, but vain, being that of which the Canonists
       say that it is lawful to oppose vanity to vanity. But we Inquisitors are of the same opinion as
       the Holy Doctors, that when, owing to the six or seven impediments which we have
       detailed, the remedies of sacred words and lawful exorcism are not sufficient, then those
       who are so bewitched are to be exhorted to bear with patient spirit the devils of this present
       life for the purgation of their crimes, and not to seek further in any way for superstitious and
       vain remedies. Therefore, if anyone is not content with the aforesaid lawful exorcisms, and

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b06c.html (2 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:51 PM]
Part II, Question II, Chapter VI

       wishes to have recourse to remedies which are, at least, vain, of which we have spoken
       before, let him know that he does not do this with our consent or permission. But the reason
       why we have so carefully explained and detailed such remedies is that we might bring into
       some sort of agreement the opinions of such Doctors as Duns Scotus and Henry of Segusio
       on the one hand, and those of the other Theologians on the other hand. Yet we are in
       agreement with S. Augustine in his Sermon against Fortune-tellers and Diviners, which is
       called the Sermon on Auguries, where he says: Brethren, you know that I have often
       entreated you that you should not follow the customs of Pagans and sorcerers, but this has
       had little effect on some of you. Yet, if I do not speak out to you, I shall be answerable for
       you in the Day of Judgement, and both you and I must suffer eternal damnation. Therefore I
       absolve myself before God, that again and again I admonish and adjure you, that none of
       you seek out diviners or fortune-tellers, and that you consult with them for no cause or
       infirmity; for whosoever commits this sin, the sacrament of baptism is immediately lost in
       him, and he at once becomes a sacrilegious and a Pagan, and unless he repents will perish in
       eternity.
             And afterwards he adds: Let no one observe days for going out and coming back; for
       God hath made all things well, and He Who ordained one day ordained also another. But as
       often as you have to do anything or to go out, cross yourselves in the name of Christ, and
       saying faithfully the Creed or the Lord's Prayer you may go about your business secure in
       the help of God.
             But certain superstitious sons of our times, not content with the above securities and
       accumulating error upon error, and going beyond the meaning or intention of Scotus and the
       Canonists, try to justify themselves with the following arguments. That natural objects have
       certain hidden virtues the cause of which cannot be explained by men; as a lodestone attracts
       iron, and many other such things which are enumerated by S. Augustine in the City of God,
       xxi. Therefore, they say, to seek the recovery of one's health by the virtue of such things,
       when exorcisms and natural medicines have failed, will not be unlawful, although it may
       seem to be vain. This would be the case if a man tried to procure his own or another's health
       by means of images, not necromantic but astrological, or by rings and such devices. They
       argue also that, just as natural matter is subject to the influence of the stars, so also are
       artificial objects such as images, which receive some hidden virtue from the stars by which
       they can cause certain effects: therefore it is not unlawful to make use of such things.
             Besides, the devils can in very many ways change bodies, as S. Augustine says, de
       Trinitate, 3, and as is evident in the case of those who are bewitched: therefore it is lawful to
       use the virtues of such bodies for the removing of witchcraft.
             But actually all the Holy Doctors are of an entirely contrary opinion to this, as has been
       shown here and there in the course of this work.
             Therefore we can answer their first argument in this way: that if natural objects are
       used in a simple way to produce certain effects for which they are thought to have some
       natural virtue, this is not unlawful. But if there are joined to this certain characters and
       unknown signs and vain observations, which manifestly cannot have any natural efficacy,
       then it is superstitious and unlawful. Wherefore S. Thomas, II, q. 96, art. 2, speaking of this
       matter, says that when any object is used for the purpose of causing some bodily effect, such
       as curing the sick, notice must be taken whether such objects appear to have any natural
       quality which could cause such an effect; and if so, then it is not unlawful, since it is lawful


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b06c.html (3 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:51 PM]
Part II, Question II, Chapter VI

       to apply natural causes to their effects. But if it does not appear that they can naturally cause
       such effects, it follows that they are not applied as causes of those effects, but as signs or
       symbols; and so they pertain to some pact symbolically formed with devils. Also S.
       Augustine says, in the City of God, xxi: The devils ensnare us by means of creatures formed
       not by themselves, but by God, and with various delights consonant with their own
       versatility; not as animals with food, but as spirits with signs, by various kinds of stones and
       herbs and trees, animals and charms and ceremonies.
             Secondly, S. Thomas, says: The natural virtues of natural objects follow their material
       forms which they obtain from the influence of the stars, and from the same influence they
       derive certain active virtues. But the forms of artificial objects proceed from the conception
       of the craftsman; and since, as Aristotle says in his Physics, I, they are nothing but an
       artificial composition, they can have no natural virtue to cause any effect. It follows then
       that the virtue received from the influence of the stars can only reside in natural and not in
       artificial objects. Therefore, as S. Augustine says in the City of God, x, Porphyry was in
       error when he thought that from herbs and stones and animals, and from certain sounds and
       voices and figures, and from certain configurations in the revolutions of the stars and their
       motions, men fabricated on earth certain Powers corresponding to the various effects of the
       stars; as if the effects of magicians proceeded from the virtue of the stars. But, as S.
       Augustine adds, all such matters belong to the devils, the deceivers of souls which are
       subject to them. So also are those images which are called astronomical the work of devils,
       the sign of which is that they have inscribed upon them certain characters which can have no
       natural power to effect anything; for a figure or sign is no cause of natural action. But there
       is this difference between the images of astronomers and those of necromancers; that in the
       case of the latter there is an open invocation, and therefore an open and expressed pact with
       devils; whereas the signs and characters on astronomical images imply only a tacit pact.
             Thirdly, there is no power given to men over devils, whereby a man may lawfully use
       them for his own purposes; but there is war declared between man and the devils, therefore
       by no means may he use the help of devils, by either a tacit or an expressed pact with them.
       So says S. Thomas.
             To return to the point: he says, "By no means"; therefore not even by the means of any
       vain things in which the devil may in any way be involved. But if they are merely vain, and
       man in his frailty has recourse to them for the recovery of his health, let him repent for the
       past and take care for the future, and let him pray that his sins may be forgiven and that he
       be no more led into temptation; as S. Augustine says at the end of his Rule.
                                                                 Page 3 of 3


                                                  Question II, Chapter VII

                                                      Main Index


                                                    Part II, Question II, Chapter VI
                                                   was transcribed by Christie Rice.


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b06c.html (4 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:51 PM]
Part II, Question II, Chapter VI

                         HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                 All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b06c.html (5 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:51 PM]
Notes

            “Remove hence.” The miracle of the removal of a mountain was actually performed by S.
        Gregory Thaumaturgus, Bishop of Neocaesarea (d. circa 270-275), as the Venerable Bede
        tells us in his Commentary upon “S. Mark” xi: “Hoc quoque fieri potuisset, ut mons ablatus
        de terra mitteretur in mare, si necessitas id fieri poscisset. Quomodo legimus factum
        precibus beati patris Gregorii Neocaesareae Ponti Antistitis, uiri mentis et virtutibus eximii,
        ut mons in terra tantum loco cederet, quantum incolae ciuitatis opus habebant. Cum enim
        uolens aedificare ecclesiam in loco apto, uident eum angustiorem esse quam res exigebat,
        eo quod ex una parte rupe maris, ex alia monte proximo coarctaretur; uenit nocte ad locum,
        et genibus flexis admonuit Dominum promissionis suae, ut montem longius iuxta fidem
        petentis ageret. Et mane facto reuersus inuenit montem tantum spatii reliquisse structoribus
        ecclesiae, quantum opus habuerant.”




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2069.html [2002-01-20 12:03:51 PM]
Notes

            “Ceremonies.” Actually baptismal exorcism is earlier than S. Gregory. From the very
        first catechumens were exorcised as a preparation for the Sacrament of Baptism. In this
        connexion exorcism is a symbolical anticipation of one of the chief effects of the Sacrament
        of Regeneration, and since it was used in the case of children who had no personal sins, S.
        Augustine, writing against the Pelagians, appeals to it as clearly implying the doctrine of
        original sin. S. Cyril of Jerusalem in his “Catecheses,” A.D. 347, gives a detailed
        description of baptismal exorcism, by which it appears that anointing with exorcised oil
        formed a part of this function in the East. The earliest Western witness which explicitly
        treads unction as part of the baptismal exorcism is that of the Arabic Canons of Hippolytus.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2070.html [2002-01-20 12:03:51 PM]
Notes

            “Auguries.” The “De Auguriis,” which is often ascribed to another writer, may be found
        in the Migne S. Augustine, Ap. V, 2268.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2071.html [2002-01-20 12:03:51 PM]
Part II, Question VII, Chapter VII


                                  THE
                          MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                      PART II, QUESTION II.
                                                         CHAPTER VII
                  Remedies prescribed against Hailstorms, and for Animals that are Bewitched.

             With regard to the remedies for betwitched animals, and charms against tempests, we
       must first note some unlawful remedies which are practised by certain people. For these are
       done by means of superstitious words or actions; as when men cure the worms in the fingers
       or limbs by means of certain words or charms, the method of deciding the legality of which
       has been explained in the preceding chapter. There are others who do not sprinkle Holy
       Water over bewitched cattle, but pour it into their mouths.
             Beside the proofs we have already given that the remedy of words is unlawful, William
       of Paris, whom we have often quoted, gives the following reason. If there were any virtue in
       words as words, then it would be due to one of three things: either their material, which is
       air; or their form, which is sound; or their meaning; or else to all three together. Now it
       cannot be due to air, which has no power to kill unless it be poisonous; neither can it be due
       to sound, the power of which is broken by a more solid object; neither can it be due to the
       meaning, for in that case the words Devil or Death or Hell would always be harmful, and the
       words Health and Goodness always be beneficial. Also it cannot be due to all these three
       together; for when the parts of a whole are invalid, the whole itself is also invalid.
             And it cannot validly be objected that God gave virtue to words just as He did to herbs
       and stones. For whatever virtue there is in certain sacramental words and benedictions and
       lawful incantations belongs to them, not as words, but by Divine institution and ordinance
       according to God's promise. It is, as it were, a promise from God that whoever does such
       and such a thing will receive such and such a grace. And so the words of the sacraments are
       effective because of their meaning; although some hold that they have an intrinsic virtue;
       but these two opinions are not mutually inconsistent. But the case of other words and
       incantations is clear from what has already been said; for the mere composing or uttering or
       writing of words, as such, can have no effect; but the invocation of the Divine Name, and
       public prayer, which is a sacred protestation committing the effect to the Divine Will, are
       beneficial.
             We have treated above of remedies performed by actions which seem to be unlawful.
       The following is a common practice in parts of Swabia. On the first of May before sunrise
       the women of the village go out and gather from the woods leaves and branches from
       willow trees, and weave them into a wreath which they hang over the stable door, affirming
       that all the cattle will then remain unhurt and safe from witchcraft for a whole year. And in
       the opinion of those who hold that vanity may be opposed by vanity, this remedy would not
       be unlawful; and neither would be the driving away of diseases by unknown cantrips and
       incantations. But without meaning and offence, we say that a woman or anyone else may go
       out on the first or any other day of the month, without considering the rising or the setting of

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b07a.html (1 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:52 PM]
Part II, Question VII, Chapter VII

       the sun, and collect herbs or leaves and branches, saying the Lord's Prayer or the Creed, and
       hang them over the stable door in good faith, trusting to the will of God for their protective
       efficacy; yet even so the practice is not above reproach, as was shown in the preceding
       chapter in the words of S. Jerome; for even if he is not invoked, the devil has some part in
       the efficacy of herbs and stones.
             It is the same with those who make the sign of the Cross with leaves and consecrated
       flowers on Palm Sunday, and set it up among their vines or crops; asserting that, although
       the crops all round should be destroyed by hail, yet they will remain unharmed in their own
       fields. Such matters should be decided upon according to the distinction of which we have
       already treated.
             Similarly there are women who, for the preservation of milk and that cows should not
       be deprived of their milk by witchcraft, give freely to the poor in God's name the whole of a
       Sunday's yield of milk; and say that, by this sort of alms, the cows yield even more milk and
       are preserved from witchcraft. This need not be regarded as superstitious, provided that it is
       done out of pity for the poor, and that they implore the Divine mercy for the protection of
       their cattle, leaving the effect to the good pleasure of Divine providence.
             Again, Nider in the First chapter of his Præceptorium says that it is lawful to bless
       cattle, in the same way as sick men, by means of written charms and sacred words, even if
       they have the appearance of incantations, as long as the seven conditions we have mentioned
       are observed. For he says that devout persons and virgins have been known to sign a cow
       with the sign of the Cross, together with the Lord's Prayer and the Angelic Salutation, upon
       which the devil's work has been driven off, if it is due to witchcraft.
             And in his Formicarius he tells that witches confess that their witchcraft is obstructed
       by the reverent observation of the ceremonies of the Church; as by the aspersion of Holy
       Water, or the consumption of consecrated salt, by the lawful use of candles on the Day of
       Purification and of blessed palms, and such things. For this reason the Church uses these in
       her exorcisms, that they may lessen the power of the devil.
             Also, because when witches wish to deprive a cow of milk they are in the habit of
       begging a little of the milk or butter which comes from that cow, so that they may
       afterwards by their art bewitch the cow; therefore women should take care, when they are
       asked by persons suspected of this crime, not to give away the least thing to them.
             Again, there are women who, when they have been turning a church for a long while to
       no purpose, and if they suspect that this is due to some witch, procure if possible a little
       butter from the house of that witch. Then they make that butter into three pieces and throw
       them into the churn, invoking the Holy Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; and
       so all witchcraft is put to flight. Here again it is a case of opposing vanity to vanity, for the
       simple reason that the butter must be borrowed from the suspected witch. But if it were done
       without this; if with the invocation of the Holy Trinity and the Lord's Prayer the woman
       were to commit the effect of the Divine Will, she would remain beyond reproach.
       Nevertheless it is not a commendable practice to throw in the three pieces of butter; for it
       would be better to banish the witchcraft by means of sprinkling Holy Water or putting in
       some exorcised salt, always with the prayers we have mentioned.
             Again, since often the whole of a person's cattle are destroyed by witchcraft, those who
       have suffered in this way ought to take care to remove the soil under the threshold of the
       stable or stall, and where the cattle go to water, and replace it with fresh soil sprinkled with
       Holy Water. For witches have often confessed that they have placed some instrument of

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b07a.html (2 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:52 PM]
Part II, Question VII, Chapter VII

       witchcraft at the instance of devils, they have only had to make a hole in which the devil has
       placed the instrument of witchcraft; and that this was a visible object, such as a stone or a
       piece of wood or a mouse or some serpent. For it is agreed that the devil can perform such
       things by himself without the need of any partner; but usually, for the perdition of her soul,
       he compels a witch to co-operate with him.
              In addition to the setting up of the sign of the Cross which we have mentioned, the
       following procedure is practised against hailstorms and tempests. Three of the hailstones are
       thrown into the fire with an invocation of the Most Holy Trinity, and the Lord's Prayer and
       the Angelic Salutation are repeated twice or three times, together with the Gospel of S. John,
       In the beginning was the Word. And the sign of the Cross is made in every direction towards
       each quarter of the world. Finally, The Word was made Flesh is repeated three times, and
       three times, “By the words of this Gospel may this tempest be dispersed.” And suddenly, if
       the tempest is due to witchcraft, it will cease. This is most true and need not be regarded
       with any suspicion. For if the hailstones were thrown into the fire without the invocation of
       the Divine Name, then it would be considered superstitious.
              But it may be asked whether the tempest could not be stilled without the use of those
       hailstones. We answer that it is the other sacred words that are chiefly effective; but by
       throwing in the hailstones a man means to torment the devil, and tries to destroy his works
       by the invocation of the Holy Trinity. And he throws them into the fire rather than into
       water, because the more quickly they are dissolved the sooner is the devil's work destroyed.
       But he must commit to the Divine Will the effect which is hoped for.
              Relevant to this is the reply given by a witch to a Judge who asked her if there were
       any means of stilling a tempest raised by witchcraft. She answered: Yes, by this means. I
       adjure you, hailstorms and winds, by the five wounds of Christ, and by the three nails which
       pierced His hands and feet, and by the four Holy Evangelists, Matthew, Mark, Luke and
       John, that you be dissolved and fall as rain.
              Many also confess, some freely and some under stress of torture, that there are five
       things by which they are much hindered, sometimes entirely, sometimes in part, sometimes
       so that they cannot harm his friends. And these are, that a man should have a pure faith and
       keep the commandments of God; that he should protect himself with the sign of the Cross
       and with prayer; that he should reverence the rites and ceremonies of the Church; that he
       should be diligent in the performance of public justice; and that he should meditate aloud or
       in his heart on the Passion of Christ. And of these things Nider also speaks. And for this
       reason it is a general practice of the Church to ring bells as a protection against storms, both
       that the devils may flee from them as being consecrated to God and refrain from their
       wickedness, and also that the people may be roused up to invoke God against tempests with
       the Sacrament of the Altar and sacred words, following the very ancient custom of the
       Church in France and Germany.
              But since this method of carrying out the Sacrament to still a storm seems to many a
       little superstitious, because they do not understand the rules by which it is possible to
       distinguish between that which is superstitious and that which is not; therefore it must be
       considered that five rules are given by which anyone may know whether an action is
       superstitious, that is, outside the observances of the Christian religion, or whether it is in
       accordance with the due and proper worship and honour of God, proceeding from the true
       virtue of religion both in the thoughts of the heart and in the actions of the body. For these
       are explained in the gloss on Colossians ii, where S. Paul says: Which things have a show of

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b07a.html (3 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:52 PM]
Part II, Question VII, Chapter VII

       wisdom in superstition; and the gloss says: Superstition is religion observed without due
       discipline; as was said before.
              The first of these is, that in all our works the glory of God ought to be our chief aim; as
       it is said: Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever else ye do, do all in the glory of God.
       Therefore in every work relating to the Christian religion let care be taken that it is to the
       glory of God, and that in it man should give the glory chiefly to God, so that by that very
       work the mind of man may be put in subjection to God. And although, according to this
       rule, the ceremonies and legal procedures of the Old Testament are not now observed, since
       they are to be understood figuratively, whereas the truth is made known in the New
       Testament, yet the carrying out of the Sacrament or of Relics to still a storm does not seem
       to militate against this rule.
              The second rule is that care should be taken that the work is a discipline to restrain
       concupiscence, or a bodily abstinence, but in the way that is owed to virtue, that is,
       according to the rites of the Church and moral doctrine. For S. Paul says, Romans xii: Let
       your service be reasonable. And because of this rule, they are foolish who make a vow not
       to comb their hair on the Sabbath, or who fast on Sunday, saying, The better the day the
       better the deed, and such like. But again it does not seem that it is superstitious to carry out
       the Sacrament, etc.
              The third rule is to be sure that what is done is in accordance with the statutes of the
       Catholic Church, or with the witness of Holy Scripture, or according at least to the rites of
       some particular Church, or in accordance with universal use, which S. Augustine says may
       be taken as a law. Accordingly when the Bishops of the English were in doubt because the
       Mass was celebrated in different manners in different Churches, S. Gregory wrote to them
       that they might use whatever methods they found most pleasing to God, whether they
       followed the rites of the Roman or of the Gallican or of any other Church. For the fact that
       different Churches have different methods in Divine worship does not militate against the
       truth, and therefore such customs are to be preserved, and it is unlawful to neglect them.
       And so, as we said in the beginning, it is a very ancient custom in the Churches of France
       and some parts of Germany, after the consecration of the Eucharist to carry It out into the
       open; and this cannot be unlawful, provided that It is not carried exposed to the air, but
       enclosed and contained in a Pyx.
              The fourth rule is to take care that what is done bears some natural relation to the effect
       which is expected; for if it does not, it is judged to be superstitious. On this account
       unknown characters and suspected names, and the images or charts of necromancers and
       astronomer, are altogether to be condemned as suspect. But we cannot say that on this
       account it is superstitious to carry out Holy Relics or the Eucharist as a protection against
       the plagues of the devil; for it is rather a most religious and salutary practice, since in that
       Sacrament lies all our help against the Adversary.
              The fifth rule is to be careful that what is done should give no occasion for scandal or
       stumbling; for in that case, although it be not superstitious, yet because of the scandal it
       should be forgone or postponed, or done secretly without scandal. Therefore if this carrying
       of the Sacrament can be done without scandal, or even secretly, then it should not be
       neglected. For by this rule many secular priests neglect the use of benedictions by means of
       devout words either uttered over the sick or bound round their necks. I say that nothing
       should be done, at least publicly, if it can give any occasion of stumbling to other simple


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b07a.html (4 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:52 PM]
Part II, Question VII, Chapter VII

       folk.
           Let this be enough on the subject of the remedies against hailstorms, either by words or
       lawful actions.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                 Question II, Chapter VIII

                                                      Main Index


                                                 Part II, Question II, Chapter VII
                                               was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b07a.html (5 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:52 PM]
Notes

           “Charms.” Cf. Shirley's comedy “The Sisters,” licensed April 1642, where Antonio says
        to one of the supposed astrologers, III, I:
              “You are one of the knaves that stroll the country,
              And live by picking worms out of fools' fingers.”




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2072.html [2002-01-20 12:03:52 PM]
Notes

           “Glory of God.” “I. Corinthians” x, 31.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2073.html [2002-01-20 12:03:52 PM]
Part II, Question II, Chapter VIII


                                  THE
                          MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                      PART II, QUESTION II.
                                                         CHAPTER VIII
                          Certain Remedies prescribed against those Dark and Horrid Harms
                                         with which Devils may Afflict Men.

             Yet again we reserve our judgement in discussing the remedies against certain injuries
       to the fruits of the earth, which are caused by canker-worms, or by huge flights of locusts
       and other insects which cover vast areas of land, and seem to hide the surface of the ground,
       eating up everything to the very roots in the vineyards and devouring fields of ripe crops. In
       the same light too we consider the remedies against the stealing of children by the work of
       devils.
             But with regard to the former kind of injury we may quote S. Thomas, the Second of
       the Second, Question 90, where he asks whether it is lawful to adjure an irrational creature.
       He answers that it is; but only in the way of compulsion, by which it is sent back to the
       devil, who uses irrational creatures to harm us. And such is the method of adjuration in the
       exorcisms of the Church by which the power of the devil is kept away from irrational
       creatures. But if the adjuration is addressed to the irrational creature itself, which
       understands nothing, then it would be nugatory and vain. From this it can be understood that
       they can be driven off by lawful exorcisms and adjurations, the help of the Divine mercy
       being granted; but first the people should be bidden to fast and to go in procession and
       practice other devotions. For this sort of evil is sent on account of adulteries and the
       multiplication of crimes; wherefore men must be urged to confess their sins.
             In some provinces even solemn excommunications are pronounced; but then they
       obtain power of adjuration over devils.
             Another terrible thing which God permits to happen to men is when their own children
       are taken away from women, and strange children are put in their place by devils. And these
       children, which are commonly called changelings, or in the German tongue Wechselkinder,
       are of three kinds. For some are always ailing and crying, and yet the milk of four women is
       not enough to satisfy them. Some are generated by the operation of Incubus devils, of
       whom, however, they are not the sons, but of that man from whom the devil has received the
       semen as a Succubus, or whose semen he has collected from some nocturnal pollution in
       sleep. For these children are sometimes, by Divine permission, substituted for the real
       children.
             And there is a third kind, when the devils at times appear in the form of young children
       and attach themselves to the nurses. But all three kinds have this in common, that though
       they are very heavy, they are always ailing and do not grow, and cannot receive enough
       milk to satisfy them, and are often reported to have vanished away.
             And it can be said that the Divine pity permits such things for two reasons. First, when
       the parents dote upon their children too much, and this a punishment for their own good.

file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b08a.html (1 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:03:53 PM]
Part II, Question II, Chapter VIII

       Secondly, it is to be presumed that the women to whom such things happen are very
       superstitious, and are in many other ways seduced by devils. But God is truly jealous in the
       right sense of the word, which means a strong love for a man's own wife, which not only
       does not allow another man to approach her, but like a jealous husband will not suffer the
       hint or suspicion of adultery. In the same way is God jealous of the soul which He bought
       with His Precious Blood and espoused in the Faith; and cannot suffer it to be touched by, to
       converse with, or in any way to approach or have dealings with the devil, the enemy and
       adversary of salvation. And if a jealous husband cannot suffer even a hint of adultery, how
       much more will he be disturbed when adultery is actually committed! Therefore it is no
       wonder if their own children are taken away and adulterous children substituted.
             And indeed that it may be more strongly impressed how God is jealous of the soul, and
       will not suffer anything which might cause a suspicion, it is shown in the Old Law where,
       that He might drive His people farther from idolatry, He not only forbade idolatry, but also
       many other things which might give occasion to idolatry, and seemed to have no use in
       themselves, although in some marvellous way they retain some use in a mystical sense. For
       He not only says in Exodus xxii: Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live on this earth; but He
       adds this: She shall not dwell in thy land, lest perchance she cause thee to sin. Similarly
       common bawds and bulkers are put to death, and not allowed to company with men.
             Note the jealousy of God, Who says as follows in Deuteronomy xxii: If thou find a
       bird's nest, and the dam sitting upon the eggs or upon the young ones, thou shalt not take the
       dam with the young, but thou shalt let the dam fly away; because the Gentiles used these to
       procure sterility. The jealous God would not suffer in His people this sign of adultery. In
       like manner in our days when old women find a penny, they think it a sign of great fortune;
       and conversely, when they dream of money it is an unlucky sign. Also God taught that all
       vessels should be covered, and that when a vessel had no cover it should be considered
       unclean.
             There was an erroneous belief that when devils came in the night (or the Good People
       as old women call them, though they are witches, or devils in their forms) they must eat up
       everything, that afterwards they may bring greater abundance of stores. Some people give
       colour to the story, and call them Screech Owls; but this is against the opinion of the
       Doctors, who say that there are no rational creatures except men and Angels; therefore they
       can only be devils.
             Again, in Leviticus xix: Ye shall not round the corners of your heads, neither shalt thou
       mar the corners of thy beard; because they did this idolatrously in veneration of idols.
             Again in Deuteronomy xxii: God says that men shall not put on the garments of
       women, or conversely; because they did this in honour of the goddess Venus, and others in
       honour of Mars or Priapus.
             And for the same reason He commanded the altars of idols to be destroyed; and
       Hezechias destroyed the Brazen Serpent when the people wanted to sacrifice to it, saying: It
       is brass. For the same reason He forbade the observance of visions and auguries, and
       commanded that the man or woman in whom there was a familiar spirit should be put to
       death. Such are now called soothsayers. All these things, because they give rise to suspicion
       of spiritual adultery, therefore, as has been said, from the jealousy which God has for the
       souls He has espoused, as a husband espouses a wife, they were all forbidden by Him.
             And so we preachers also ought to bear in mind that no sacrifice is more acceptable to


file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b08a.html (2 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:03:53 PM]
Part II, Question II, Chapter VIII

       God than a jealousy of souls, as S. Jerome says in his commentaries upon Ezekiel.
             Therefore in the Third Part of this work we shall treat the extermination of witches,
       which is the ultimate remedy. For this is the last recourse of the Church, to which she is
       bound by Divine commandment. For it has been said: Ye shall not suffer witches to live
       upon the earth. And with this will be included the remedies against archer-wizards; since
       this kind can only be exterminated by secular law.
             A remedy. When certain persons for the sake of temporal gain have devoted
       themselves entirely to the devil, it has often been found that, though they may be freed from
       the devil's power by true confession, yet they have been long and grievously tormented,
       especially in the night. And God allows this for their punishment. But a sign that they have
       been delivered is that, after confession, all the money in their purses or coffers vanishes.
       Many examples of this could be adduced, but for the sake of brevity they are passed over
       and omitted.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                                  Part III

                                                      Main Index


                                                  Part II, Question II, Chapter VIII
                                                  was transcribed by Christie Rice.

                         HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                 All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/mm02b08a.html (3 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:03:53 PM]
Notes

           “Good People.” So in Ireland the fairies are called “good people,” and traditionally
        seem to be of a benevolent and capricious and even mischievous disposition. In some parts
        of Highland Scotland fairies are called “daoine sithe” or “men of peace,” and it is believed
        that every year the devil carries off a tenth part of them.
           It will be readily remembered that to the Greeks the Fairies were                  , the
        gracious goddesses.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_II/notes/n2074.html [2002-01-20 12:03:53 PM]
The Third Part


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                THE THIRD PART
       RELATING TO THE JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS IN BOTH THE
     ECCLESIASTICAL AND CIVIL COURTS AGAINST WITCHES AND
                     INDEED ALL HERETICS
   CONTAINING XXXV QUESTIONS IN WHICH IS MOST CLEARLY SET OUT THE FORMAL RULES FOR
    INITIATING A PROCESS OF JUSTICE, HOW IT SHOULD BE CONDUCTED, AND THE METHOD OF
                                 PRONOUNCING SENTENCE.


General and                               Who are the Fit and Proper Judges in the Trial of Witches?
Introductory


                                                       THE FIRST HEAD

Question I                                                 The Method of Initiating a Process


Question II                                                        Of the Number of Witnesses


Question III                              Of the Solemn Adjuration and Re-examination of Witnesses


Question IV                                         Of the Quality and Condition of Witnesses


Question V                                  Whether Mortal Enemies may be Admitted as Witnesses


                                                    THE SECOND HEAD

Question VI                       How the Trial is to be Proceeded with and Continued. And how the Witnesses
                                  are to be Examined in the Presence of Four Other Persons, and how the
                                  Accused is to be Questioned in Two Ways



file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_toc.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:54 PM]
The Third Part

Question VII                      In Which Various Doubts are Set Forth with Regard to the Foregoing
                                  Questions and Negative Answers. Whether the Accused is to be Imprisoned,
                                  and when she is to be considered Manifestly Taken in the Foul Heresy of
                                  Witchcraft. This is the Second Action


Question VIII                     Which Follows from the Preceding Question, Whether the Witch is to be
                                  Imprisoned, and of the Method of Taking her. This is the Third Action of the
                                  Judge


Question IX                       What is to be done after the Arrest, and whether the Names of the Witnesses
                                  should be made Known to the Accused. This is the Fourth Action


Question X                        What Kind of Defence may be Allowed, and of the Appointment of an
                                  Advocate. This is the Fifth Action


Question XI                       What Course the Advocate should Adopt when the Names of the Witnesses are
                                  not Revealed to him. Ths Sixth Action


Question XII                      Of the Same Matter, Declaring more Particularly how the Question of
                                  Personal Enmity is to be Investigated. The Seventh Action


Question XIII                     Of the Points to be Observed by the Judge before the Formal Examination in
                                  the Place of Detention and Torture. This is the Eighth Action


Question XIV                      Of the Method of Sentencing the Accused to be Questioned: and How she must
                                  be Questioned on the First Day; and Whether she may be Promised her Life.
                                  The Ninth Action


Question XV                       Of the Continuing of the Torture, and of the Devices and Signs by which the
                                  Judge can Recognize a Witch; and how he ought to Protect himself from their
                                  Spells. Also how they are to be Shaved in Parts where they use to Conceal the
                                  Devil's Masks and Tokens; together with the due Setting Forth of Various
                                  Means of Overcoming the Obstinacy in Keeping Silence and Refusal to
                                  Confess. And it is the Tenth Action




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_toc.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:54 PM]
The Third Part

Question XVI                      Of the fit Time and of the Method of the Second Examination. And it is the
                                  Eleventh Action, concerning the Final Precautions to be Observed by the
                                  Judge


                                                       THE THIRD HEAD

The Third Head                    Which is the last Part of this Work. How the Process is to be Concluded by the
                                  Pronouncement of a Definite and Just Sentence


Question XVII                     Of Common Purgation, and especially of the Trial of Red-hot Iron, to which
                                  Witches Appeal


Question XVIII                      Of the Manner of Pronouncing a Sentence which is Final and Definitive


Question XIX                      Of the Various Degrees of Overt Suspicion which render the Accused liable to
                                  be Sentenced


Question XX                                       Of the Firth Method of Pronouncing Sentence


Question XXI                      Of the Second Method of Pronouncing Sentence, when the Accused is no more
                                  than Defamed


Question XXII                     Of the Third Kind of Sentence, to be Pronounced on one who is Defamed, and
                                  who is to be put to the Question


Question XXIII                    The Fourth Method of Sentencing, in the Case of one Accused upon a Light
                                  Suspicion


Question XXIV                       The Fifth Manner of Sentence, in the Case of one under Strong Suspicion


Question XXV                         The Sixth Kind of Sentence, in the Case of one who is Gravely Suspect


Question XXVI                      The Method of passing Sentence upon one who is both Suspect and Defamed



file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_toc.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:54 PM]
The Third Part


Question XVII                     The Method of passing Sentence upon one who hath Confessed to Heresy, but
                                  is still not Penitent


Question XVIII                    The Method of passing Sentence upon one who hath Confessed to Heresy but
                                  is Relapsed, Albeir now Penitent


Question XXIX                     The Method of passing Sentence upon one who hath Confessed to Heresy but
                                  is Impenitent, although not Relapsed


Question XXX                        Of One who has Confessed to Heresy, is Relapsed, and is also Impenitent


Question XXXI                                Of One Taken and Convicted, but Denying Everything


Question XXXII                    Of One who is Convicted but who hath Fled or who Contumaciously Absents
                                  himself


Question XXXIII                   Of the Method of passing Sentence upon one who has been Accused by another
                                  Witch, who has been or is to be Burned at the Stake


Question XXXIV                    Of the Method of passing Sentence upon a Witch who Annuls Spells wrought
                                  by Witchcraft; and of Witch Midwives and Archer-Wizards


Question XXXV                     Finally, of the Method of passing Sentence upon Witches who Enter or Cause
                                  to be Entered an Appeal, whether such be Frivolous or Legitimate and Just


                                                   Main Index


                                          "The Malleus Maleficarum" was transcribed by
                                               Wicasta Lovelace and Christie Rice.

                          HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998 - 2000 by the Windhaven Network.
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_toc.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:54 PM]
Part III, General & Introductory - P.1


                                  THE
                          MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                GENERAL & INTRODUCTORY
                                Who are the Fit and Proper Judges in the Trial of Witches?

             The question is whether witches, together with their patrons and protectors and
       defenders, are so entirely subject to the jurisdiction of the Diocesan Ecclesiastical Court and
       the Civil Court so that the Inquisitors of the crime of heresy can be altogether relieved from
       the duty of sitting in judgement upon them. And it is argued that this is so. For the Canon (c.
       accusatus, § sane, lib. VI) says: Certainly those whose high privilege it is to judge
       concerning matters of the faith ought not to be distracted by other business; and Inquisitors
       deputed by the Apostolic See to inquire into the pest of heresy should manifestly not have to
       concern themselves with diviners and soothsayers, unless these are also heretics, nor should
       it be their business to punish such, but they may leave them to be punished by their own
       judges.
             Nor does there seem any difficulty in the fact that the heresy of witches is not
       mentioned in that Canon. For these are subject to the same punishment as the others in the
       court of conscience, as the Canon goes on to say (dist. I, pro dilectione). If the sin of
       diviners and witches is secret, a penance of forty days shall be imposed upon them: if it is
       notorious, they shall be refused the Eucharist. And those whose punishment is identical
       should receive it from the same Court. Then, again, the guilt of both being the same, since
       just as soothsayers obtain their results by curious means, so do witches look for and obtain
       from the devil the injuries which they do to creatures, unlawfully seeking from His creatures
       that which should be sought from God alone; therefore both are guilty of the sin of idolatry.
             This is the sense of Ezechiel xxi, 23; that the King of Babylon stood at the cross-roads,
       shuffling his arrows and interrogating idols.
             Again it may be said that, when the Canon says “Unless these are also heretics,” it
       allows that some diviners and soothsayers are heretics, and should therefore be subject to
       trial by the Inquisitors; but in that case artificial diviners would also be so subject, and no
       written authority for that can be found.
             Again, if witches are to be tried by the Inquisitors, it must be for the crime of heresy;
       but it is clear that the deeds of witches can be committed without any heresy. For when they
       stamp into the mud of the Body of Christ, although this is a most horrible crime, yet it may
       be done without any error in the understanding, and therefore without heresy. For it is
       entirely possible for a person to believe that It is the Lord's body, and yet throw It into the
       mud to satisfy the devil, and this by reason of some pact with him, that he may obtain some
       desired end, such as the finding of a treasure or anything of that sort. Therefore the deeds of
       witches need involved no error in faith, however great the sin may be; in which case they
       are not liable to the Court of the Inquisition, but are left to their own judges.
             Again, Solomon showed reverence to the gods of his wives out of complaisance, and
       was not on that account guilty of apostasy from the Faith; for in his heart he was faithful and

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_00a.html (1 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:55 PM]
Part III, General & Introductory - P.1

       kept the true Faith. So also when witches give homage to devils by reason of the pact they
       have entered into, but keep the Faith in their hearts, they are not on that account to be
       reckoned as heretics.
             But it may be said that all witches have to deny the Faith, and therefore must be judged
       heretics. On the contrary, even if they were to deny the Faith in their hearts and minds, still
       they could not be reckoned as heretics, but as apostates. But a heretic is different from an
       apostate, and it is heretics who are subject to the Court of the Inquisition; therefore witches
       are not so subject.
             Again it is said, in c. 26, quest. 5: Let the Bishops and their representatives strive by
       every means to rid their parishes entirely of the pernicious art of soothsaying and magic
       derived from Zoroaster; and if they find any man or woman addicted to this crime, let him
       be shamefully cast out of their parishes in disgrace. So when it says at the end of c. 348, Let
       them leave them to their own Judges; and since it speaks in the plural, both of the
       Ecclesiastic and the Civil Court; therefore, according to this Canon they are subject to no
       more than the Diocesan Court.
             But if, just as these arguments seem to show it to be reasonable in the case of
       Inquisitors, the Diocesans also wish to be relieved of this responsibility, and to leave the
       punishment of witches to the secular Courts, such a claim could be made good by the
       following arguments. For the Canon says, c. ut inquisitionis: We strictly forbid the temporal
       lords and rulers and their officers in any way to try to judge this crime, since it is purely an
       ecclesiastical matter: and it speaks of the crime of heresy. It follows therefore that, when the
       crime is not purely ecclesiastical, as is the case with witches because of the temporal injuries
       which they commit, it must be punished by the Civil and not by the Ecclesiastical Court.
             Besides, in the last Canon Law concerning Jews it says: His goods are to be
       confiscated, and he is to be condemned to death, because with perverse doctrine he opposed
       the Faith of Christ. But if it is said that this law refers to Jews who have been converted, and
       have afterwards returned to the worship of the Jews, this is not a valid objection. Rather is
       the argument strengthened by it; because the civil Judge has to punish such Jews as
       apostates from the Faith; and therefore witches who abjure the Faith ought to be treated in
       the same way; for abjuration of the Faith, either wholly or in part, is the essential principle
       of witches.
             And although it says that apostasy and heresy are to be judged in the same way, yet it is
       not the part of the ecclesiastical but of the civil Judge to concern himself with witches. For
       no one must cause a commotion among the people by reason of a trial for heresy; but the
       Governor himself must make provision for such cases.
             The Authentics of Justinian, speaking of ruling princes, says: You shall not permit
       anyone to stir up your Province by reason of a judicial inquiry into matters concerning
       religions or heresies, or in any way allow an injunction to be put upon the Province over
       which you govern; but you shall yourself provide, making use of such monies and other
       means of investigation as are competent, and not allow anything to be done in matters of
       religion except in accordance with our precepts. It is clear from this that no one must meddle
       with a rebellion against the Faith except the Governor himself.
             Besides, if the trial and punishment of such witches were not entirely a matter for the
       civil Judge, what would be the purpose of the laws which provide as follows? All those who
       are commonly called witches are to be condemned to death. And again: Those who harm
       innocent lives by magic arts are to be thrown to the beasts. Again, it is laid down that thy are

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_00a.html (2 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:55 PM]
Part III, General & Introductory - P.1

       to be subjected to questions and tortures; and that none of the faithful are to associate with
       them, under pain of exile and the confiscation of all their goods. And many other penalties
       are added, which anyone may read in those laws.
              But in contradiction of all these arguments, the truth of the matter is that such witches
       may be tried and punished conjointly by the Civil and the Ecclesiastical Courts. For a
       canonical crime must be tried by the Governor and the Metropolitan of the Province; not by
       the Metropolitan alone, but together with the Governor. This is clear in the Authentics,
       where ruling princes are enjoined as follows: If it is a canonical matter which is to be tried,
       you shall inquire into it together with the Metropolitan of the Province. And to remove all
       doubt on this subject, the gloss says: If it is a simple matter of the observance of the faith,
       the Governor alone may try it; but if the matter is more complicated, then it must be tried by
       a Bishop and the Governor; and the matter must be kept within decent limits by someone
       who has found favour with God, who shall protect the orthodox faith, and impose suitable
       indemnities of money, and keep our subjects inviolate, that is, shall not corrupt the faith in
       them.
              And again, although a secular prince may impose the capital sentence, yet this does not
       exclude the judgement of the Church, whose part it is to try and judge the case. Indeed this
       is perfectly clear from the Canon Law in the chapters de summa trin. and fid. cath., and
       again in the Law concerning heresy, c. ad abolendam and c. urgentis and c.
       excommunicamus, 1 and 2. For the same penalties are provided by both the Civil and the
       Canon Laws, as is shown by the Canon Laws concerning the Manichaean and Arian
       heresies. Therefore the punishment of witches belongs to both Courts together, and not to
       one separately.
              Again, the laws decree that clerics shall be corrected by their own Judges, and not by
       the temporal or secular Courts, because their crimes are considered to be purely
       ecclesiastical. But the crime of witches is partly civil and partly ecclesiastical, because they
       commit temporal harm and violate the faith; therefore it belongs to the Judges of both
       Courts to try, sentence, and punish them.
              This opinion is substantiated by the Authentics, where it is said: If it is an ecclesiastical
       crime needing ecclesiastical punishment and fine, it shall be tried by a Bishop who stands in
       favour with God, and not even the most illustrious Judges of the Province shall have a hand
       in it. And we do not wish the civil Judges to have any knowledge of such proceedings; for
       such matters must be examined ecclesiastically and the souls of the offenders must be
       corrected by ecclesiastical penalties, according to the sacred and divine rules which our laws
       worthily follow. So it is said. Therefore it follows that on the other hand a crime which is of
       a mixed nature must be tried and punished by both courts.
              We make our answer to all the above as follows. Our main object here is to show how,
       with God's pleasure, we Inquisitors of Upper Germany may be relieved of the duty of trying
       witches, and leave them to be punished by their own provincial Judges; and this because of
       the arduousness of the work: provided always that such a course shall in no way endanger
       the preservation of the faith and the salvation of souls. And therefore we engaged upon this
       work, that we might leave to the Judges themselves the methods of trying, judging and
       sentencing in such cases.
              Therefore in order to show that the Bishops can in many cases proceed against witches
       without the Inquisitors; although they cannot so proceed without the temporal and civil


file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_00a.html (3 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:55 PM]
Part III, General & Introductory - P.1

       Judges in cases involving capital punishment; it is expedient that we set down the opinions
       of certain other Inquisitors in parts of Spain, and (saving always the reverence due to them),
       since we all belong to one and the same Order of Preachers, to refute them, so that each
       detail may be more clearly understood.
              Their opinion is, then, that all witches, diviners, necromancers, and in short all who
       practise any kind of divination, if they have once embraced and professed the Holy Faith,
       are liable to the Inquisitorial Court, as in the three cases noted in the beginning of the
       chapter, Multorum querela, in the decretals of Pope Clement concerning heresy; in which it
       says that neither must the Inquisitor proceed without the Bishop, nor the Bishop without the
       Inquisitor: although there are five other cases in which one may proceed without the other,
       as anyone who reads the chapter may see. But in one case it is definitively stated that one
       must not proceed without the other, and that is when the above diviners are to be considered
       as heretics.
              In the same category they place blasphemers, and those who in any way invoke devils,
       and those who are excommunicated and have contumaciously remained under the ban of
       excommunication for a whole year, either because of some matter concerning faith or, in
       certain circumstances, not on account of the faith; and they further include several other
       such offences. And by reason of this the authority of the Ordinary is weakened, since so
       many more burdens are placed upon us Inquisitors which we cannot safely bear in the sight
       of the terrible Judge who will demand from us a strict account of the duties imposed upon
       us.
              And because their opinion cannot be refuted unless the fundamental thesis upon which
       it is founded is proved unsound, it is to be noted that it is based upon the commentators on
       the Canon, especially on the chapter accusatus, and § sane, and on the words “savour of
       heresy.” Also they rely upon the sayings of the Theologians, S. Thomas, Blessed Albert, and
       S. Bonaventura, in the Second Book of Sentences, dist. 7.
              It is best to consider some of these in detail. For when the Canon says, as was shown in
       the first argument, that the Inquisitors or heresy should not concern themselves with
       soothsayers and diviners unless they manifestly savour of heresy, they say that soothsayers
       and diviners are of two sorts, either artificial or heretical. And the first sort are called
       diviners pure and simple, since they work merely by art; and such are referred to in the
       chapter de sortilegiis, where it says that the presbyter Udalricus went to a secret place with a
       certain infamous person, that is, a diviner, says the gloss, not with the intention of invoking
       the devil, which would have been heresy, but that, by inspecting the astrolabe, he might find
       out some hidden thing. And this, they say, is pure divination or sortilege.
                                                                 Page 1 of 4


                                         General & Introductory Continued . . . .

                                                        Main Index


                                                   Part III, “General & Introductory”


file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_00a.html (4 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:55 PM]
Part III, General & Introductory - P.1

                                               was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                            HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998, 1999 by the Windhaven Network.
                                                  All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_00a.html (5 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:55 PM]
Notes

           “Arrows.” Esarhaddon is employing a mode of sortilege by arrows, belomancy, which
        was extensively practised among the Chaldeans, as also among the Arabs. Upon this text S.
        Jerome comments: “He shall stand in the highway, and consult the oracle after the manner
        of his nation, that he may cast arrows into a quiver, and mix them together, being written
        upon or marked with the names of each people, that he may see whose arrow will come
        forth, and which city he ought first to attack.” The arrows employed by the Arabs were often
        three in number, upon the first of which was inscribed, “My Lord hath commanded me”;
        upon the second, “My Lord hath forbidden me”; and the third was blank. If the inquirer
        drew the first it was an augury of success; the second gave an omen of failure; if the third
        were drawn, all three were mixed again and another trial was made. In some countries
        diving rods were employed instead of arrows. These were drawn from a vessel, or, it might
        be, cast into the air, the position in which they fell being carefully noted. This practice is
        rhabdomancy. The LXX, “Ezechiel” xxi, 21, reads                         , not                  ,
        and rhabdomancy is mentioned by S. Cyril of Alexandria. The “Koran,” V, forbids
        prognostication by divining arrows, which are there denounced as “an abomination of the
        work of Satan.” See my “History of Witchcraft,” Chap. V, pp. 182-83.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/notes/n3001.html [2002-01-20 12:03:55 PM]
Notes

          “Manichaean.” For the close connexion between the Manichees and witches see my
        “History of Witchcraft,” Chap. I.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/notes/n3002.html [2002-01-20 12:03:56 PM]
Notes

           “Pope Clement.” Pope Clement V, born at Villandraut, 1264; elected to the Chair of S.
        Peter, 5 June, 1305; died at Roquemare, 20 April, 1314; completed the mediaeval “Corpus
        Iuris Canonici” by the publication of a collection of papal decretals known as
        “Clementinae” or “Liber Clementinarum,” sometimes as “Liber Septimus” in reference to
        “Liber Sextus” of Bonafice VIII. It contains decretals of this latter Pontiff, of Benedict XI,
        and of Clement himself. Together with the decrees of the Council of Vienne it was
        promulgated, 12 March, 1314, at the Papal residence of Monteaux near Carpentras. It is
        divided into five books with subdivisions of titles and chapters. As Clement V died before the
        collection had been generally published, John XXII promulgated it anew, 25 October, 1317,
        and sent it to the University of Bologna as the authorative Corpus of decretals to be used in
        the courts and schools.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/notes/n3003.html [2002-01-20 12:03:56 PM]
Part III, General & Introductory - P.2


                                  THE
                          MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                         GENERAL & INTRODUCTORY CONTINUED

             But the second sort are called heretical diviners, whose art involves some worship of or
       subjection to devils, and who essay by divination to predict the future of something of that
       nature, which manifestly savours of heresy; and such are, like other heretics, liable to the
       Inquisitorial Court.
             And that this is the meaning of the Canon they prove from commentaries of the
       Canonists on the word “savour.” For Giovanni d’Andrea, writing on this Canon accusatus,
       and the word “saviour,” says: They savour of heresy in this way, that they utter nefarious
       prayers and offer sacrifices at the altars of idols, and they consult with devils and receive
       answers from them; or they meet together to practise heretical sortes, that they may have an
       answer, re-baptize a child, and practise other such matters.
             Many others also they quote in support of their opinion, including John Modestus; S.
       Raymund, and William de Laudun, O.P. And they refer to the decision of the Church at the
       Council of Aquitaine, c. 26, q. 5, Episcopi, where such superstitious women are called
       infidels, saying, Would that these had perished alone in their perfidy. And perfidy in a
       Christian is called heresy; therefore they are subject to the Court of the Inquisitors of heresy.
             They quote also the Theologians, especially S. Thomas, the Second Book of Sentences,
       dist. 7, where he considers whether it is a sin to use the help of devils. For speaking of that
       passage in Esaias viii: Should not a people seek unto their God? he says among other things:
       In everything the fulfilment of which is looked for from the power of the devil, because of a
       pact entered into with him, there is apostasy from the faith, either in word, if there is some
       invocation, or in deed, even if there be no sacrifice offered.
             To the same effect they quote Albertus, and Peter of Tarentaise, and Giovanni
       Bonaventura, who has lately been canonized, not under the name of Giovanni, although that
       was his true name. Also they quote Alexander of Hales and Guido the Carmelite. All these
       say that those who invoke devils are apostates, and consequently heretics, and therefore
       subject to the Court of the Inquisitors of heretics.
             But the said Inquisitors of Spain have not, by the above or any other arguments, made
       out a sufficient case to prove that such soothsayers etc. may not be tried by the Ordinary or
       the Bishops without the Inquisitors; and that the Inquisitors may not be relieved from the
       duty of trying such diviners and necromancers, and even witches: not that the Inquisitors are
       not rather to be praised than blamed when they do try such cases, when the Bishops fail to
       do so. And this is the reason that they have not proved their case. The Inquisitors need only
       concern themselves with matters of heresy, and the heresy must be manifest; as is shown by
       the frequently quoted Canon accusatus, § sane.
             This being the case, it follows that however serious and grave may be the sin which a
       person commits, if it does not necessarily imply heresy, then he must not be judged as a
       heretic, although he is to be punished. Consequently an Inquisitor need not interfere in the


file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_00b.html (1 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:57 PM]
Part III, General & Introductory - P.2

       case of a man who is to be punished as a malefactor, but not as a heretic, but may leave him
       to be tried by the Judges of his own Province.
             It follows again that all the crimes of invoking devils and sacrificing to them, of which
       the Commentators and Canonists and Theologians speak, are no concern of the Inquisitors,
       but can be left to the secular or episcopal Courts, unless they also imply heresy. This being
       so, and it being the case that the crimes we are considering are very often committed without
       any heresy, those who are guilty of such crimes are not to be judged or condemned as
       heretics, as is proved by the following authorities and arguments.
             For a person rightly to be adjudged a heretic he must fulfil five conditions. First, there
       must be an error in his reasoning. Secondly, that error must be in matters concerning the
       faith, either being contrary to the teaching of the Church as to the true faith, or against sound
       morality and therefore not leading to the attainment of eternal life. Thirdly, the error must lie
       in one who has professed the Catholic faith, for otherwise he would be a Jew or a Pagan, not
       a heretic. Fourthly, the error must be of such a nature that he who holds it must confess
       some of the truth of Christ as touching either His Godhead or His Manhood; for is a man
       wholly denies the faith, he is an apostate. Fifthly, he must pertinaciously and obstinately
       hold to and follow that error. And that this is the sense of heretics is proved as follows (not
       by way of refuting, but of substantiating the gloss of the Canonists).
             For it is well known to all through common practice that the first essential of a heretic
       is an error in the understanding; but two conditions are necessary before a man can be called
       a heretic; the first material, that is, an error in reasoning, and the second formal, that is, an
       obstinate mind. S. Augustine shows this when he says: A heretic is one who either initiates
       or follows new and false opinions. It can also be proved by the following reasoning: heresy
       is a form of infidelity, and infidelity exists subjectively in the intellect, in such a way that a
       man believes something which is quite contrary to the true faith.
             This being so, whatever crime a man commits, if he acts without an error in his
       understanding he is not a heretic. For example, if a man commits fornication or adultery,
       although he is disobeying the command Thou shalt not commit adultery, yet he is not a
       heretic unless he holds the opinion that it is lawful to commit adultery. The point can be
       argued in this way: When the nature of a thing is such that two constituent parts are
       necessary to its existence, if one of those two parts is wanting the thing itself cannot exist;
       for if it could, then it would not be true that that part is necessary to its existence. For in the
       constitution of a house it is necessary that there should be a foundation, walls, and a roof;
       and if one of these is missing, there is no house. Similarly, since an error in the
       understanding is a necessary condition of heresy, no action which is done entirely without
       any such error can make a man a heretic.
             Therefore we Inquisitors of Germany are in agreement with Blessed Antoninus where
       he treats of this matter in the second part of his Summa; saying that to baptize things, to
       worship devils, to sacrifice to them, to tread underfoot the Body of Christ, and all such
       terrible crimes, do not make a man a heretic unless there is an error in his understanding.
       Therefore a man is not a heretic who, for example, baptizes an image, not holding any
       erroneous belief about the Sacrament of Baptism or its effect, nor thinking that the baptism
       of the image can have any effect of its own virtue; but does this in order that he may more
       easily obtain some desire from the devil whom he seeks to please by this means, acting with
       either an implied or an expressed pact that the devil will fulfil the desires either of himself or
       of someone else. In this way men who, with either a tacit or an expressed pact, invoke devils

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_00b.html (2 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:57 PM]
Part III, General & Introductory - P.2

       with characters and figures in accordance with magic practice to perform their desires are
       not necessarily heretics. But they must not ask from the devil anything which is beyond the
       power or the knowledge of the devil, having a wrong understanding of his power and
       knowledge. Such would be the case with any who believed that the devil could coerce a
       man's free will; or that, by reason of their pact with him, the devil could do anything which
       they desired, however much it were forbidden by God; or that the devil can know the whole
       of the future; or that he can effect anything which only God can do. For there is no doubt
       that men with such beliefs have an error in their understanding, holding a wrong opinion of
       the power of the devil; and therefore, granting the other conditions necessary for heresy,
       they would be heretics, and would be subject at once to the Ordinary and to the Inquisitorial
       Court.
             But if they act for the reasons we have said, not out of any wrong belief concerning
       baptism or the other matters we have mentioned, as they very commonly do; for since
       witches and necromancers know that the devil is the enemy of the faith and the adversary of
       salvation, it must follow that they are compelled to believe in their hearts that there is great
       might in the faith and that there is no false doctrine of which the father of lies is not known
       to be the origin; then, although they sin most grievously, yet they are not heretics. And the
       reason is that they have no wrong belief concerning the sacrament, although they use it
       wrongly and sacrilegiously. Therefore they are rather sorcerers than heretics, and are to be
       classed with those whom the above Canon accusatus declares are not properly subject to the
       Inquisitorial Court, since they do not manifestly savour of heresy; their heresy being hidden,
       if indeed it exists at all.
             It is the same with those who worship and sacrifice to the devil. For if they do this in
       the belief that there is any divinity in devils, or that they ought to be worshipped and that, by
       reason of such worship, that can obtain from the devil what they desire in spite of the
       prohibition or permission of God, then they are heretics. But if they act in such a way not
       out of any such belief concerning the devil, but so that they may the more easily obtain their
       desires because of some pact formed with the devil, then they are not necessarily heretics,
       although they sin most grievously.
             For greater clearness, some objections are to be disposed of and refuted. For it appears
       to be against our argument that, according to the laws, a simonist is not a heretic (1, q. 1:
       “Whoever by means of money, but not having an error of the understanding”). For a
       simonist is not in the narrow and exact sense of the word a heretic; but broadly speaking and
       by comparison he is so, according to S. Thomas, when he buys or sells holy things in the
       belief that the gift of grace can be had for money. But if, as is often the case, he does not act
       in this belief, he is not a heretic. Yet he truly would be if he did believe that the gift of grace
       could be had for money.
             Again we are apparently in opposition to what is said of heretics in the Canon; namely,
       that he who reveres a heretic is himself a heretic, but he who worships the devil sins more
       heavily than he who reveres a heretic, therefore, etc.
             Also, a man must be obviously a heretic in order that he may be judged as such. For the
       Church is competent to judge only of those things which are obvious, God alone having
       knowledge and being the Judge of that which is hidden (dist. 33, erubescant). But the inner
       understanding can only be made apparent by intrinsic actions, either seen or proved;
       therefore a man who commits such actions as we are considering is to be judged a heretic.
             Also, it seems impossible that anyone should commit such an action as the treading

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_00b.html (3 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:57 PM]
Part III, General & Introductory - P.2

       underfoot of the Body of Christ unless he held a wrong opinion concerning the Body of
       Christ; for it is impossible for evil to exist in the will unless there is error in the
       understanding. For according to Aristotle every wicked man is either ignorant or in error.
       Therefore, since they who do such things have evil in their wills, they must have an error in
       their understandings.
             To these three objections we answer as follows; and the first and third may be
       considered together. There are two kinds of judgement, that of God and that of men. God
       judges the inner man; whereas man can only judge of the inner thoughts as they are reflected
       by outer actions, as is admitted in the third of these arguments. Now he who is a heretic in
       the judgement of God is truly and actually a heretic; for God judges no one as a heretic
       unless he has some wrong belief concerning the faith in his understanding. But when a man
       is a heretic in the judgement of men, he need not necessarily be actually a heretic; but
       because his deeds give an appearance of a wrong understanding of the faith he is, by legal
       presumption, considered to be a heretic.
             And if it be asked whether the Church should stigmatize at once as heretics those who
       worship devils or baptize imagines, note these answers. First, it belongs rather to the
       Canonists than to the Theologians to discriminate in this matter. The Canonists will say that
       they are by legal presumption to be considered as heretics, and to be punished as such. A
       Theologian will say that it is in the first instance a matter for the Apostolic See to judge
       whether a heresy actually exists or is only to be presumed in law. And this may be because
       whenever an effect can proceed from a twofold cause, no precise judgement can be formed
       of he actual nature of the cause merely on the basis of the effect.
             Therefore, since such effects as the worship of the devil or asking his help in the
       working of witchcraft, by baptizing an image, or offering to him a living child, or killing an
       infant, and other matters of this sort, can proceed from two separate causes, namely, a belief
       that it is right to worship the devil and sacrifice to him, and that images can receive
       sacraments; or because a man has formed some pact with the devil, so that he may obtain
       the more easily from the devil that which he desires in those matters which are not beyond
       the capacity of the devil, as we have explained above; it follows that no one ought hastily to
       form a definite judgement merely on the basis of the effect as to what is its cause, that is,
       whether a man does such things out of a wrong opinion concerning the faith. So when there
       is no doubt about the effect, still it is necessary to inquire farther into the cause; and if it be
       found that a man has acted out of a perverse and erroneous opinion concerning the faith,
       then he is to be judged a heretic and will be subject to trial by the Inquisitors together with
       the Ordinary. But if he has not acted for these reasons, he is to be considered a sorcerer, and
       a very vile sinner.
                                                                 Page 2 of 4


                                         General & Introductory Continued . . . .

                                                        Main Index




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_00b.html (4 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:57 PM]
Part III, General & Introductory - P.2

                                                 Part III, “General & Introductory”
                                               was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                            HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998, 1999 by the Windhaven Network.
                                                  All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_00b.html (5 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:03:57 PM]
Notes

           “Bonaventura.” The parents of S. Bonaventura were Giovanni di Fidanze and Maria
        Ritella. He was born at Bagnorea, near Viterbo, in 1221, and baptized Giovanni. This was
        changed to Bonaventura owing to the exclamation of S. Francis, “O buona ventura,” when
        the child was brought to him to be cured of a dangerous illness. (This account has been
        doubted, and it is true that others bore the name before S. Bonaventura.) S. Bonaventura
        was canonized by Sixtus IV, 14 April, 1482. This formal enrolment in the catalogue of the
        Saints was thus long delayed mainly owing to the unfortunate dissensions concerning
        Franciscan affairs after the Saint's death, 15 July, 1274. He was inscribed among the
        principal Doctors of the Church by Sixtus V, 14 March, 1587. His feast is celebrated 14
        July.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/notes/n3004.html [2002-01-20 12:03:57 PM]
Notes

           “Guido the Carmelite.” Guy de Perpignan, “Doctor PArisiensis,” d. 1342; General of
        the Carmelite Order from 1318-20. His chief work was the “Summa de Haeresibus.”




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/notes/n3005.html [2002-01-20 12:03:57 PM]
Part III, General & Introductory - P.3


                                  THE
                          MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                         GENERAL & INTRODUCTORY CONTINUED

             Another answer which touches the matter nearly is that, whatever may be said and
       alleged, it is agreed that all diviners and witches are judged as heretics by legal presumption
       and not by actual fact are subject to the Court of the Ordinary, not of the Inquisitors. And
       the aforesaid Inquisitors of other countries cannot defend their opinions by quoting the
       Canon and its commentators, because they who sacrifice to and worship devils are judged to
       be heretics be legal presumption, and not because the facts obviously show that they are
       such. For the text says that they must savour of heresy manifestly, that is, intrinsically and
       by their very nature. And it is enough for us Inquisitors to concern ourselves with those who
       are manifestly from the instrinsic nature of the case heretics, leaving others to their own
       judges.
             It has been said that the cause must be inquired into, to know whether or not a man acts
       out of an error of faith; and this is easy. For the spirit of faith is known by the act of faith; as
       the spirit of chastity is shown by a chaste life; similarly the Church must judge a man a
       heretic if his actions show that he disputes any article of the faith. In this way even a witch,
       who has wholly or in part denied the faith, or used vilely the Body of Christ, and offered
       homage to the devil, may have done this merely to propitiate the devil; and even if she has
       totally denied the faith in her heart, she is to be judged as an apostate, for the fourth
       condition, which is necessary before anyone can rightly be said to be a heretic, will be
       wanting.
             But if against this conclusion be set the Bull and commission given to us by our Holy
       Father Innocent VIII, that witches should be tried by the Inquisitors, we answer in this way.
       That this is not to say that the Diocesans also cannot proceed to a definite sentence against
       witches, in accordance with those ancient laws, as has been said. For that Bull was rather
       given to us because of the great care with which we have wrought to the utmost of our
       ability with the help of God.
             Therefore we cannot concede to those other Inquisitors their first argument, since the
       contrary conclusion is rather the true one; for simonists are thought to be heretics only be
       legal presumption, and the Ordinaries themselves without the Inquisitors can try them.
       Indeed, the Inquisitors have no need to concern themselves with various simonists, or
       similarly with any others who are judged to be heretics only by legal presumption. For they
       cannot proceed against schismatic Bishops and other high Dignitaries, as is shown by the
       chapter of the Inquisition Concerning Heretics, Book VI, where is says: The Inquisitors of
       the sin of heresy deputed by the Apostolic See or by any other authority have no power to
       try such offenders on this sort of charge, or to proceed against them under pretext of their
       office, unless it is expressly stated in the letters of commission from the Apostolic See that
       they are empowered to do so.
             But if the Inquisitors know or discover that Bishops or other high Dignitaries have been


file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_00c.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:58 PM]
Part III, General & Introductory - P.3

       charged with heresy, or have been denounced or suspected of that crime, it is their duty to
       report the fact to the Apostolic See.
             Similarly the answer to their second argument is clear from what has been said. For he
       who cherishes and comforts a heretic is himself a heretic if he does this in the belief that he
       is worthy to be cherished or honoured on account of his doctrine or opinion. But if he
       honours him for some temporal reason, without any error of faith in his understanding, he is
       not rightly speaking a heretic, though he is so by a legal fiction or presumption or
       comparison, because he acts as if he held a wrong belief concerning the faith like him whom
       he cherishes: so in this case he is not subject to the Inquisitorial Court.
             The third argument is similarly answered. For though a man should be judged by the
       Church as a heretic on account of his outward actions, visible and proved, yet it does not
       always follow that he is actually a heretic, but is only so reputed by legal presumption.
       Therefore in this case he is not liable to be tried by the Inquisitorial Court, because he does
       not manifestly savour of heresy.
             For their fourth argument, it is a false assumption to say that it is not possible for
       anyone to tread underfoot the Body of Christ unless he has some perverse and wrong belief
       concerning the Body of Christ. For a man may do this with a full knowledge of his sin, and
       with a firm belief that the Body of Christ is truly there. But he does it to please the devil,
       and that he may more easily obtain his desire from him. And though in every sin there is an
       error, it need not necessarily be an error of the understanding, which is heresy or a wrong
       belief concerning the faith; for it may be an erroneous use of some power which turns it to
       vicious purposes; and then it will only be the first of those five conditions which are
       necessary constituents of heresy, in accordance with which a heretic is rightly liable to the
       Inquisitorial Court.
             And it is not a valid objection to say that an Inquisitor may, nevertheless, proceed
       against those who are denounced as heretics, or are under a light or a strong or a grave
       suspicion of heresy, although they do not appear to savour manifestly of heresy. For we
       answer that an Inquisitor may proceed against such in so far as they are denounced or
       suspected for heresy rightly so called; and this is the sort of heresy of which we are speaking
       (as we have often said), in which there is an error in the understanding, and the other four
       conditions are superadded. And the second of these conditions is that such error should
       consist in matters concerning the faith, or should be contrary to the true decisions of the
       Church in matters of faith and good behaviour and that which is necessary for the attainment
       of eternal life. For if the error be in some matter which does not concern the faith, as, for
       example, a belief that the sun is not greater than the earth, or something of that sort, then it
       is not a dangerous error. But an error against Holy Scripture, against the articles of the faith,
       or against the decision of the Church, as has been said above, is heresy (art. 24, q. 1, haec
       est fides).
             Again, the determination of doubts respecting the faith belongs chiefly to the Church,
       and especially to the Supreme Pontiff, Christ's Vicar, the successor of S. Peter, as is
       expressly stated (art. 24, q. 1, quotiens). And against the determination of the Church, as S.
       Thomas says, art. 2, q. 2, no Doctor or Saint maintains his own opinion; not S. Jerome nor S.
       Augustine nor any other. For just as he who obstinately argues against the faith is a heretic,
       so also is he who stubbornly maintains his opinion against the determination of the Church
       in matters concerning the faith and that which is necessary for salvation. For the Church
       herself has never been proved to be in error over matter of faith (as it is said in art. 24, q. 1,

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_00c.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:58 PM]
Part III, General & Introductory - P.3

       a recta, and in other chapters). And it is expressly said, that he who maintains anything
       against the determination of the Church, not in an open and honest manner, but in matters
       which concern faith and salvation, is a heretic. For he need not be a heretic because he
       disagrees over other matters, such as the separability of law from use in matters which are
       affected by use: this matter has been settled by Pope John XXII in his Extrauagantes, where
       he says that they who contradict this opinion are stubborn and rebellious against the Church,
       but not heretics.
             The third condition required is that he who holds the error should be one who has
       professed the Catholic faith. For is a man has never professed the Christian faith, he is not a
       heretic but simply an infidel, like the Jews or the Gentiles who are outside the faith.
       Therefore S. Augustine says in the City of God: The devil, seeing the human race to be
       delivered from the worship of idols and devils, stirred up heretics who, under the guise of
       Christians, should oppose Christian doctrine. So for a man to be a heretic it is necessary that
       he should have received the Christian faith in baptism.
             Fourthly, it is necessary that the man who so errs should retain some of the true belief
       concerning Christ, pertaining either to His divinity or to His humanity. For if he retains no
       part of the faith, he is more rightly to be considered an apostate than a heretic. In this way
       Julian was an apostate. For the two are quite different, though sometimes they are confused.
       For in this manner there are found to be men who, driven by poverty and various afflictions,
       surrender themselves body and soul to the devil, and deny the faith, on condition that the
       devil will help them in their need to the attainment of riches and honours.
             For we Inquisitors have known some, of whom a few afterwards repented, who have
       behaved in this way merely for the sake of temporal gain, and not through any error in the
       understanding; wherefore they are not rightly heretics, nor even apostates in their hearts, as
       was Julian, though they must be reckoned as apostates.
             They who are apostates in their heart and refuse to return to the faith are, like
       impenitent heretics, to be delivered to the secular Court. But if they are desirous of
       reconciliation, they are received back into the Church, like penitent heretics. See the chapter
       ad abolendam, § praesenti, de haeretic., lib. 6. Of the same opinion is S. Raymund in his
       work de Apostolica, cap. reuertentes, where he says that they who return from the perfidy of
       apostasy, though they were heretics, are to be received back like penitent heretics. And here
       the two are confused, as we have said. And he adds: Those who deny the faith through fear
       of death (that is, who deny the faith for the sake of temporal gain from the devil, but do not
       believe their error) are heretics in the sight of the law, but are not, properly speaking,
       heretics. And he adds: Although they have no erroneous belief, yet since the Church must
       judge by outward signs they are to be considered as heretics (not this fiction of law); and if
       they return, they are to be received as penitent heretics. For the fear of death, or the desire
       for temporal gain, is not sufficient to cause a constant man to deny the faith of Christ.
       Wherefore he concludes that it is more holy to die than to deny the faith or to be fed by
       idolatrous means, as S. Augustine says.
             The judgement of witches who deny the faith would be the same; that when they wish
       to return they should be received as penitents, but otherwise they should be left to the
       secular Court. But they are by all means to be received back into the bosom of the Church
       when they repent; and are left to the secular Court if they will not return; and this is because
       of the temporal injuries which they cause, as will be shown in the methods of passing


file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_00c.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:58 PM]
Part III, General & Introductory - P.3

       sentence. And all this may be done by the Ordinary, so that the Inquisitor can leave his
       duties to him, at least in a case of apostasy; for it is otherwise in other cases of sorcerers.
             The fifth condition necessary for a man to be rightly thought a heretic is that he should
       obstinately and stubbornly persist in his error. Hence, according to S. Jerome, the
       etymological meaning of heresy is Choice. And again S. Augustine says: Not he who
       initiates or follows false doctrines, but he who obstinately defends them, is to be considered
       a heretic. Therefore if anyone does not evilly persist in believing some false doctrine, but
       errs through ignorance and is prepared to be corrected and to be shown that his opinion is
       false and contrary to Holy Scripture and the determination of the Church, he is not a heretic.
       For he was ready to be corrected when his error was pointed out to him. And it is agreed that
       every day the Doctors have various opinions concerning Divine matters, and sometimes they
       are contradictory, so that one of them must be false; and yet none of them are reputed to be
       false until the Church has come to a decision concerning them. See art. 24, q. 3, qui in
       ecclesia.
             From all this is is concluded that the sayings of the Canonists on the words “savour
       manifestly of heresy” in the chapter accusatus do not sufficiently prove that witches and
       others who in any way invoke devils are subject to trial by the Inquisitorial Court; for it is
       only by a legal fiction that they judge such to be heretics. Neither is it proved by the words
       of the Theologians; for they call such persons apostates either in word or in deed, but not in
       their thoughts and their hearts; and it is of this last error that the words “savour of heresy”
       speak.
             And though such persons should be judged to be heretics, it does not follow form this
       that a Bishop cannot proceed against them without an Inquisitor to a definite sentence, or
       punish them with imprisonment or torture. More than this, even when this decision does not
       seem enough to warrant the exemption of us Inquisitors from the duty of trying witches, still
       we are unwilling to consider that we are legally compelled to perform such duties ourselves,
       since we can depute the Diocesans to our office, at least in respect of arriving at a
       judgement.
                                                                 Page 3 of 4


                                         General & Introductory Continued . . . .

                                                        Main Index


                                                 Part III, “General & Introductory”
                                               was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                            HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998, 1999 by the Windhaven Network.
                                                  All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_00c.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:58 PM]
Notes

            “Extrauagantes.” This word designates some Papal decretals not contained in certain
        canonical collections which possess a special authority, that is, they are not found in (but
        “wander outside,” “extra uagari”) the Decree of Gratian, or the three great official
        collections of the “Corpus Iuri” (the Decretals of Gregory IX; the Sixth Book of the
        Decretals; and the Clementines). The term is now applied to the collections known as the
        “Extrauagantes Ioannis XXII” and the “Extrauagantes Communes.” When John XXII
        (1316-34) published the Decretals already known as “Clementines,” there also existed
        various pontifical documents, obligatory upon the whole Church indeed, but not included in
        the “Corpus Iuris,” and these were called “Extrauagantes.” In 1325 Zenselinus de
        Cassanis added glosses to twenty constitutions of John XXII, and named this collection
        “Uiginti Extrauagantes papae Ioannis XXII.” Chappuis also classified these under fourteen
        titles containing all twenty chapters.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/notes/n3006.html [2002-01-20 12:03:58 PM]
Part III, General & Introductory - P.4


                                  THE
                          MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                         GENERAL & INTRODUCTORY CONTINUED

             For this provision is made in the Canon Law (c. multorum in prin. de haeret. in Clem.).
       There it says: As a result of a general complaint, and that this sort of Inquisition may
       proceed more fortunately and the inquiry into this crime be conducted more skilfully,
       diligently, and carefully, we order that this kind of case may be tried by the Diocesan
       Bishops as well as by the Inquisitors deputed by the Apostolic See, all carnal hatred or fear
       or any temporal affection of this sort being put aside; and so either of the above may move
       without the other, and arrest or seize a witch, placing her in safe custody in fetters and iron
       chains, if it seems good to him; and in this matter we leave the conduct of the affair to his
       own conscience; but there must be no negligence in inquiring into such matters in a manner
       agreeable to God and justice; but such witches must be thrust into prison rather as a matter
       of punishment than custody, or be exposed to torture, or be sentenced to some punishment.
       And a Bishop can proceed without an Inquisitor, or an Inquisitor without a Bishop; or, if
       either of their offices be vacant, their deputies may act independently of each other,
       provided that is is impossible for them to meet together for joint action within eight days of
       the time when the inquiry is due to commence; but if there be no valid reason for their not
       meeting together, the action shall be null and void in law.
             The chapter proceeds to support our contention as follows: But if the Bishop or the
       Inquisitor, or either of their deputies, are unable or unwilling, for any of the reasons which
       we have mentioned, to meet together personally, they can severally depute their duties to
       each other, or else signify their advice and approval by letters.
             From this it is clear that even in those cases where the Bishop is not entirely
       independent of the Inquisitor, the Inquisitor can depute the Bishop to act in his stead,
       especially in the matter of passing sentence: therefore we ourselves have decided to act
       according to this decision, leaving other Inquisitors to other districts to act as seems good to
       them.
             Therefore in answer to the arguments, it is clear that witches and sorcerers have not
       necessarily to be tried by the Inquisitors. But as for the other arguments which seek to make
       it possible for the Bishops in their turn to be relieved from the trial of witches, and leave this
       to the Civil Court, it is clear that this is not so easy in their case as it is in that of the
       Inquisitors. For the Canon Law (c. ad abolendam, c. uergentis, and c. excommunicamus
       utrumque) says that in a case of heresy it is for the ecclesiastical judge to try and to judge,
       but for the secular judge to carry out the sentence and to punish; that is, when a capital
       punishment is in question, though it is otherwise with other penitential punishments.
             It seems also that in the heresy of witches, though not in the case of other heresies, the
       Diocesans also can hand over to the Civil Courts the duty of trying and judging, and this for
       two reasons: first because, as we have mentioned in our arguments, the crime of witches is
       not purely ecclesiastical, being rather civil on account of the temporal injuries which they


file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_00d.html (1 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:03:58 PM]
Part III, General & Introductory - P.4

       commit; and also because special laws are provided for dealing with witches.
            Finally, it seems that in this way it is easiest to proceed with the extermination of
       witches, and that the greatest help is thus given to the Ordinary in the sight of that terrible
       Judge who, as the Scriptures testify, will exact the strictest account from and will most
       hardly judge those who have been placed in authority. Accordingly we will proceed on this
       understanding, namely, that the secular Judge can try and judge such cases, himself
       proceeding to the capital punishment, but leaving the imposition of any other penitential
       punishment to the Ordinary.

                     A Summary or Classification of the Matters Treated of in this Third Part.

             In order, then, that the Judges both ecclesiastical and civil may have a ready knowledge
       of the methods of trying, judging and sentencing in these cases, we shall proceed under three
       main heads. First, the method of initiating a process concerning matters of the faith; second,
       the method of proceeding with the trial; and third, the method of bringing it to a conclusion
       and passing sentence on witches.
             The first head deals with five difficulties. First, which of the three methods of
       procedure provided by the law is the most suitable. Second, the number of witnesses. Third,
       whether these can be compelled to take the oath. Fourth, the condition of the witnesses.
       Fifth, whether mortal enemies may be allowed to give evidence.
             The second head contained eleven Questions. I. How witnesses are to be examined, and
       that there should always be five persons present. Also how witches are to be interrogated,
       generally and particularly. (This will be numbered the Sixth Question of the whole Part; but
       we alter the numeration here to facilitate reference by the reader). II. Various doubts are
       cleared up as to negative answers, and when a witch is to be imprisoned, and when she is to
       be considered as manifestly guilty of the heresy of witchcraft. III. The method of arresting
       witches. IV. Of two duties which devolve upon the Judge after the arrest, and whether the
       names of the deponents should be made known to the accused. V. Of the conditions under
       which an Advocate shall be allowed to plead for the defence. VI. What measures the
       Advocate shall take when the names of the witnesses are not made known to him, and when
       he wishes to protest to the Judge that the witnesses are mortal enemies of the prisoner. VII.
       How the Judge ought to investigate the suspicion of such mortal enmity. VIII. Of the points
       which the Judge must consider before consigning the prisoner to torture. IX. Of the method
       of sentencing the prisoner to examination by torture. X. Of the method of proceeding with
       the torture, and how they are to be tortured; and of the provisions against silence on the part
       of the witch. XI. Of the final interrogations and precautions to be observed by the Judge.
             The third head contains first of all three Questions dealing with matters which the
       Judge must take into consideration, on which depends the whole method of passing
       sentence. First, whether a prisoner can be convicted by a trial of red-hot iron. Second, of the
       method in which all sentences should be passed. Third, what degrees of suspicion can justify
       a trial, and what sort of sentence ought to be passed in respect of each degree of suspicion.
       Finally, we treat of twenty methods of delivering sentence, thirteen of which are common to
       all kinds of heresy, and the remainder particular to the heresy of witches. But since these
       will appear in their own places, for the sake of brevity they are not detailed here.
                                                                 Page 4 of 4

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_00d.html (2 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:03:58 PM]
Part III, General & Introductory - P.4




                                                               Question I

                                                        Main Index


                                                 Part III, “General & Introductory”
                                               was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                            HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998, 1999 by the Windhaven Network.
                                                  All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_00d.html (3 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:03:58 PM]
Part III, First Head, Question I


                                  THE
                          MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                          PART III, FIRST HEAD, QUESTION I.
                                                The Method of Initiating a Process

             The first question, then, is what is the suitable method of instituting a process on behalf
       of the faith against witches. In answer to this it must be said that there are three methods
       allowed by Canon Law. The first is when someone accuses a person before a judge of the
       crime of heresy, or of protecting heretics, offering to prove it, and to submit himself to the
       penalty of talion if he fails to prove it. The second method is when someone denounces a
       person, but does not offer to prove it and is not willing to embroil himself in the matter; but
       says that he lays information out of zeal for the faith, or because of a sentence of
       excommunication inflicted by the Ordinary or his Vicar; or because of the temporal
       punishment exacted by the secular Judge upon those who fail to lay information.
             The third method involves an inquisition, that is, when there is no accuser or informer,
       but a general report that there are witches in some town or place; and then the Judge must
       proceed, not at the instance of any party, but simply by the virtue of his office.
             Here it is to be noted that a judge should not readily admit the first method of
       procedure. For one thing, it is not actuated by motives of faith, nor is it very applicable to
       the case of witches, since they commit their deeds in secret. Then, again, it is full of danger
       to the accuser, because of the penalty of talion which he will incur if he fails to prove his
       case. Then, again, it is very litigious.
             Let the process begin with a general citation affixed to the walls of the Parish Church
       or the Town Hall, in the following manner.
             WHEREAS we, the Vicar of such and such Ordinary (or the Judge of such and such
       county), do endeavour with all our might and strive with our whole heart to preserve the
       Christian people entrusted to us in unity and the happiness of the Catholic faith and to keep
       them far removed from every plague of abominable heresy: Therefore we the aforesaid
       Judge to whose office it belongs, to the glory and honour of the worshipful name of JESUS
       Christ and for the exaltation of the Holy Orthodox Faith, and for the putting down of the
       abomination of heresy, especially in all witches in general and in each one severally of
       whatever condition or estate: (Here, if he is an ecclesiastical Judge, let him add a summons
       to all priests and dignitaries of the Church in that town and for a distance of two miles about
       it, who have knowledge of this notice. And he shall add) By the authority which we exercise
       in this district, and in virtue of holy obedience and under pain of excommunication, we
       direct, command, require, and admonish that within the space of twelve days (Here the
       secular Judge shall command in his own manner under pain of penalties suitable to his
       office), the first four of which shall stand for the first warning, the second for the second,
       and the third for the third warning; and we give this treble canonical warning that if anyone
       know, see, or have heard that any person is reported to be a heretic or a witch, or of any is
       suspected especially of such practices as cause injury to men, cattle, or the fruits of the

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_01a.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:59 PM]
Part III, First Head, Question I

       earth, to the loss of the State. But if any do not obey these aforesaid commands and
       admonitions by revealing such matters within the term fixed, let him know (Here the
       ecclesiastical Judge shall add) that he is cut off by the sword of excommunication (The
       secular Judge shall add the temporal punishments). Which sentence of excommunication we
       impose as from this time by this writing upon all and several who thus stubbornly set at
       naught these our canonical warnings aforesaid, and our requirement of their obedience,
       reserving to ourselves alone the absolution of such sentence (The secular Judge shall
       conclude in this manner). Given, etc.
             Note also that in the case of the second method the following caution should be
       observed. For it has been said that the second method of procedure and of instituting a
       process on behalf of the faith is by means of an information, where the informer does not
       offer to prove his statement and is not ready to be embroiled in the case, but only speaks
       because of a sentence of excommunication, or out of zeal for the faith and for the good of
       the State. Therefore the secular Judge must specify in his general citation or warning
       aforesaid, that none should think that he will become liable to a penalty even if he fails to
       proved his words; since he comes forward not as an accuser but as an informer.
             And then, since several will appear to lay information before the Judge, he ought to
       take care to proceed in the following manner. First, let him have a Notary and two honest
       persons, either clerics or laymen; or if a Notary is not to be procured, then let there be two
       suitable men in the place of the Notary. For this is dealt with in the c. ut officium, § uerum,
       lib. 6, where it is said: But because it is expedient to proceed with great caution in the trial
       of a grave crime, that no error may be committed in imposing upon the guilty a deservedly
       severe punishment; we desire and command that, in the examination of the witnesses
       necessary in such a charge, you shall have two religious and discreet persons, either clerics
       or laymen.
             It goes on to say: In the presence of these persons the depositions of the witnesses shall
       be faithfully written down by a public official if one is obtainable, or, if not, by two suitable
       men. Note therefore that, having these persons, the Judge shall order the informer to lay his
       information in writing, or at least give it clearly by word of mouth. And then the Notary or
       the Judge shall begin to process in the following manner.
                                       In the Name of the Lord. Amen.
             In the year of Our Lord —, on the — day of the — month, in the presence of me the
       Notary and of the witnesses subscribed, N. of the town of — in the Diocese of —, as above,
       appeared in the person at — before the honourable Judge, and offered him a schedule to the
       following effect.
             (Here shall follow the schedule in its entirety. But if he has not deposed in writing buy
       by word of mouth, it shall continue thus.)
             He appeared, etc. and laid information to the Judge that N. of the town or parish of —
       in the Diocese of — had said and asserted that he knew how to perform or had actually done
       certain injuries to the deponent or to other persons.
             After this, he shall immediately make the deponent take the oath in the usual manner,
       either on the four Gospels of God, or on the Cross, raising three fingers and depressing two
       in witness of the Holy Trinity and of the damnation of his soul and body, that he will speak
       the truth in his depositions. And when the oath has been sworn, he shall question him as to
       how he knows that his depositions are true, and whether he saw or heard that to which he

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_01a.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:59 PM]
Part III, First Head, Question I

       swears. And if he says that he has seen anything, as, for example, that the accused was
       present at such a time of tempest, or that he had touched an animal, or had entered a stable,
       the Judge shall ask when he saw him, and where, and how often, and in what manner, and
       who were present. If he says that he did not see it, but heard of it, he shall ask him from
       whom he heart it, where, when, and how often, and in whose presence, making separate
       articles of each of the several points above mentioned. And the Notary or scribe shall set
       down a record of them immediately after the aforesaid denunciation; and it shall continue
       thus:
              This denunciation, as we have said, having been made, the Inquisitor himself did at
       once cause him to swear as above on the four Gospels, etc. that he was speaking the truth in
       his depositions, and did ask him how and why he knew or suspected that he what he said
       was true. He did make answer either that he saw, or that he heard. The Inquisitor did then
       ask him where he saw or heard this; and he answered on the — day of the — month in the
       year — in the town or parish of —. He asked him how often he saw or heard it, etc. And
       separate articles shall be made, and the whole set down in process, as has been said. And
       particularly he shall be asked who shared or could share in his knowledge of the case.
              When all this has been done, he shall finally be asked whether he lays his information
       out of ill-will, hatred, or rancour; or if he has omitted anything through favour or love; of if
       he has been requested or suborned to lay information.
              Finally, he shall be enjoined, by virtue of his oath, to keep secret whatever he has said
       there, or whatever the Judge has said to him; and the whole process shall be set down in
       writing. And when all this is completed, it shall be set down a little lower as follows. This
       was done at such a place on the — day of the — month in the year —, in the presence of me
       the Notary or scribe together with those associated with me in the duty of writing, and of
       such and such witnesses summoned and interrogated.
              The third method of beginning a process is the commonest and most usual one, because
       it is secret, and no accuser or informer has to appear. But when there is a general report of
       witchcraft in some town or parish, because of this report the Judge may proceed without a
       general citation or admonition as above, since the noise of that report comes often to his
       ears; and then again he can begin a process in the presence of the persons, as we have said
       before.
                                       In the Name of the Lord. Amen.
             In the year of Our Lord —, on the — day of the — month, to the ears of such and such
       official or judge there came a persistent public report and rumour that N. of the town or
       parish of — did or said such and such a thing savouring of witchcraft, against the faith and
       the common good of the State.
             And the whole shall be set down according to the common report. And a little lower:
             The case was heard on the — day of the — month in the year —, in the presence of me
       the Notary of such and such authority, or of such and such a scribe, and of such and such
       witnesses who were called and interrogated.
             But before we proceed to the second Head, which deals with the method of conducting
       this sort of process, we must first say something of the witnesses who are to be examined, as
       to how many they should be, and what should be their condition.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_01a.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:59 PM]
Part III, First Head, Question I




                                                               Question II

                                                        Main Index


                                                    Part III, First Head, Question I
                                                   was transcribed by Christie Rice.

                         HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                 All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_01a.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:03:59 PM]
Part III, First Head, Question II


                                   THE
                           MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                          PART III, FIRST HEAD, QUESTION II.
                                                     Of the Number of Witnesses

             Since we have said that in the second method the evidence of the witnesses is to be
       written down, it is necessary to know how many witnesses there should be, and of what
       condition. The question is whether a Judge may lawfully convict any person of the heresy of
       witchcraft on the evidence of two legitimate witnesses whose evidence is entirely
       concordant, or whether more than two are necessary. And we say that the evidence of
       witnesses is not entirely concordant when it is only partially so; that is, when two witnesses
       differ in their accounts, but agree in the substance or effect: as when one says “She
       bewitched my cow,” and the other says, “She bewitched my child,” but they agree as to the
       fact of witchcraft.
             But here we are concerned with the case of two witnesses being in entire, not partial,
       agreement. And the answer is that, although two witnesses seem to be enough to satisfy the
       rigour of law (for the rule is that that which is sworn to by two or three is taken for the
       truth); yet in a charge of this kind two witnesses do not seem sufficient to ensure an
       equitable judgement, on account of the heinousness of the crime in question. For the proof
       of an accusation ought to be clearer than daylight; and especially ought this to be so in the
       case of the grave charge of heresy.
             But it may be said that very little proof is required in a charge of this nature, since it
       takes very little argument to expose a person's guilt; for it is said in the Canon de Haereticis,
       lib. II, that a man makes himself a heretic if in the least of his opinions he wanders from the
       teaching and the path of the Catholic religion. We answer that this is true enough with
       reference to the presumption that a person is a heretic, but not as regards a condemnation.
       For in a charge of this sort the usual order of judicial procedure is cut short, since the
       defendant does not see the witnesses take the oath, nor are they made known to him,
       because this might expose them to grave danger; therefore, according to the statute, the
       prisoner is not permitted to know who are his accusers. But the Judge himself must by virtue
       of his office, inquire into any personal enmity felt by the witnesses towards the prisoner; and
       such witnesses cannot be allowed, as will be shown later. And when the witnesses give
       confused evidence on account of something lying on their conscience, the Judge is
       empowered to put them through a second interrogatory. For the less opportunity the prisoner
       has to defend himself, the more carefully and diligently should the Judge conduct his
       inquiry.
             Therefore, although there are two legitimate and concordant witnesses against a person,
       even so I do not allow that this would be sufficient warrant for a Judge to condemn a person
       on so great a charge; but if the prisoner is the subject of an evil report, a period should be set
       for his purgation; and if he is under strong suspicion on account of the evidence of two
       witnesses, the Judge should make him abjure the heresy, or question him, or defer his

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_02a.html (1 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:03:59 PM]
Part III, First Head, Question II

       sentence. For it does not seem just to condemn a man of good name on so great a charge on
       the evidence of only two witnesses, though the case is otherwise with a person of bad
       reputation. This matter is fully dealt with in the Canon Law of heretics, where it is set down
       that the Bishop shall cause three or more men of good standing to give evidence on oath to
       speak the truth as to whether they have any knowledge of the existence of heretics in such a
       parish.
             Again it may be asked whether the Judge can justly condemn a person of such heresy
       only on the evidence of witnesses who in some respects differ in their evidence, or merely
       on the strength of a general accusation. We answer that he cannot do so on either of the
       above grounds. Especially since the proofs of a charge ought, as we have said, to be clearer
       than daylight; and in this particular charge no one is to be condemned on merely
       presumptive evidence. Therefore in the case of a prisoner who is the subject of a general
       accusation, a period of purgation shall be set for him; and in the case of one who is under
       strong suspicion arising from the evidence of witnesses, he shall be made to abjure his
       heresy. But when, in spite of certain discrepancies, the witnesses agree in the main facts,
       then the matter shall rest with the Judge's discretion; and indirectly the question arises how
       often the witnesses can be examined.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                              Question III

                                                        Main Index


                                                  Part III, First Head, Question II
                                               was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                         HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                 All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_02a.html (2 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:03:59 PM]
Part III, First Head, Question III


                                   THE
                           MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                        PART III, FIRST HEAD, QUESTION III.
                                 Of the Solemn Adjuration and Re-examination of Witnesses

             But it may be asked whether the Judge can compel witnesses to sweat an oath to tell the
       truth in a case concerning the Faith or witches, of if he can examine them many times. We
       answer that he can do so, especially an ecclesiastical Judge, and that in ecclesiastical cases
       witnesses can be compelled to speak the truth, and this on oath, since otherwise their
       evidence would not be valid. For the Canon Law says: The Archbishop or Bishop may make
       a circuit of the parish in which it is rumoured that there are heretics, and compel three or
       more men of good repute, or even, if it seems good to him, the whole neighbourhood, to
       give evidence. And if any through damnable obstinacy stubbornly refuse to take the oath,
       they shall on that account be considered as heretics.
             And that the witnesses can be examined several times is shown by the Canon, where it
       says that, when the witnesses have given their evidence in a confused manner, or appear to
       have withheld part of their knowledge for some reason, the Judge must take care to examine
       them afresh; for he may legally do so.
                                                                Page 1 of 1


                                                             Question IV

                                                       Main Index


                                                  Part III, First Head, Question II
                                               was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                         HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                 All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_03a.html [2002-01-20 12:04:00 PM]
Part III, First Head, Question IV


                                  THE
                          MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                         PART III, FIRST HEAD, QUESTION IV.
                                           Of the Quality and Condition of Witnesses

             Note that persons under a sentence of excommunication, associates and accomplices in
       the crime, notorious evildoers and criminals, or servants giving evidence against their
       masters, are admitted as witnesses in a case concerning the Faith. And just as a heretic may
       give evidence against a heretic, so may a witch against a witch; but this only in default of
       other proofs, and such evidence can only be admitted for the prosecution and not for the
       defence: this is true also of the evidence of the prisoner's wife, sons and kindred; for the
       evidence of such has more weight in proving a charge than in disproving it.
             This is made clear in the c. in fidei de haer., where it says: As a protection of the faith
       we allow that in a case of inquiry into the sin of heresy, persons under excommunication and
       partners and accomplices in the crime shall be admitted as witnesses, in default of other
       proofs against heretics and their patrons, protectors and defenders; provided that it appears
       probably both from the number of the witnesses and of those against whom they give
       evidence, and from other cicumstances, that they are not giving false testimony.
             The case of evidence given by perjurers, when it is presumed that they are speaking out
       of zeal for the faith, is deal with in the Canon c. accusatus, § licet, where it says that the
       evidence of perjurers, after they have repented, is admissable; and it goes on to say: If it
       manifestly appears that they do not speak in a spirit of levity, or from motives of enmity, or
       by reason of a bribe, but purely out of zeal for the orthodox faith, wishing to correct what
       they have said, or to reveal something about which they had kept silence, in defence of the
       faith, their testimony shell be as valid as that of anyone else, provided that there is no other
       obection to it.
             And it is clear from the same chapter of the Canon that the testimony of men or low
       repute and criminals, and of servants against their masters, is admitted; for it says: So great
       is the plague of heresy that, in an action involving this crime, even servants are admitted as
       witnesses against their masters, and any criminal evildoer may give evidence against any
       person soever.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                              Question V

                                                        Main Index




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_04a.html (1 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:04:00 PM]
Part III, First Head, Question IV

                                                  Part III, First Head, Question II
                                               was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                         HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                 All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_04a.html (2 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:04:00 PM]
Part III, First Head, Question V


                                  THE
                          MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                          PART III, FIRST HEAD, QUESTION V.
                                   Whether Mortal Enemies may be Admitted as Witnesses

              But if it is asked whether the Judge can admit the mortal enemies of the prisoner to
       give evidence against him in such a case, we answer that he cannot; for the same chapter of
       the Canon says: You must not understand that in this kind of charge a mortal personal
       enemy may be admitted to give evidence. Henry of Segusio also makes this quite clear. But
       it is mortal enemies that are spoken of; and it is to be noted that a witness is not necessarily
       to be disqualified because of every sort of enmity. And a mortal enmity is constituted by the
       following circumstances: when there is a death feud or vendetta between the parties, or
       when there has been an attempted homicide, or some serious wound or injury which
       manifestly shows that there is mortal hatred on the part of the witness against the prisoner,
       And in such a case it is presumed that, just as the witness has tried to inflict temporal death
       on the prisoner by wounding him, so he will also be willing to effect his object by accusing
       him of heresy; and just as he wished to take away his life, so he would be willing to take
       away his good name. Therefore the evidence of such mortal enemies is justly disqualified.
              But there are other serious degrees of enmity (for women are easily provoked to
       hatred), which need not totally disqualify a witness, although they render his evidence very
       doubtful, so that full credence cannot be placed in his words unless they are substantiated by
       independent proofs, and other witnesses supply an indubitable proof of them. For the Judge
       must ask the prisoner whether he thinks that he has any enemy who would dare to accuse
       him of that crime out of hatred, so that he might compass his death; and if he says that he
       has, he shall ask who that person is; and then the Judge shall take note whether the person
       named as being likely to give evidence from motives of malice has actually done so. And if
       it is found that this is the case, and the Judge has learned from trustworthy men the cause of
       that enmity, and if the evidence in question is not substantiated by other proofs and the
       words of other witnesses, then he may safely reject such evidence. But if the prisoner says
       that he hopes he has no such enemy, but admits that he has had quarrels with women; or if
       he says that he has an enemy, but names someone who, perhaps, has not given evidence, in
       that case, even if other witnesses say that such a person has given evidence from motives of
       enmity, the Judge must not reject his evidence, but admit it together with the other proofs.
              There are many who are not sufficiently careful and circumspect, and consider that the
       depositions of such quarrelsome women should be altogether rejected, saying that no faith
       can be placed in them, since they are nearly always actuated by motives of hatred. Such men
       are ignorant of the subtlety and precautions of magistrates, and speak and judge like men
       who are colour-blind. But these precautions are dealt with in Questions XI and XII.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1



file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_05a.html (1 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:04:00 PM]
Part III, First Head, Question V


                                                              Question VI

                                                        Main Index


                                                  Part III, First Head, Question V
                                               was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_05a.html (2 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:04:00 PM]
Part III, Second Head, Question VI


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                       PART III, SECOND HEAD, QUESTION VI.
How the Trial is to be Proceeded with and Continued. And how the Witnesses are to be Examined in the
       Presence of Four Other Persons, and how the Accused is to be Questioned in Two Ways

             In considering the method of proceeding with a trial of a witch in the cause of faith, it
       must first be noted that such cases must be conducted in the simplest and most summary
       manner, without the arguments and contentions of advocates.
             This is explained in the Canon as follows: It often happens that we institute a criminal
       process, and order it to be conducted in a simple straightforward manner without the legal
       quibbles and contentions which are introduced in other cases. Now much doubt had been
       experienced as to the meaning of these words, and as to exactly in what manner such cases
       should be conducted; but we, desiring as far as possible to remove all doubt on the matter,
       sanction the following procedure once and for all as valid: The Judge to whom we commit
       such a case need not require any writ, or demand that the action should be contested; he may
       conduct the case on holidays for the sake of the convenience of the public, he should shorten
       the conduct of the case as much as he can by disallowing all dilatory exceptions, appeals and
       obstructions, the impertinent contentions of pleaders and advocates, and the quarrels of
       witnesses, and by restraining the superflous number of witnesses; but not in such a way as to
       neglect the necessary proofs; and we do not mean by this that he should omit the citation of
       and swearing of witnesses to tell and not to hide the truth.
             And since, as we have shown, the process is to be conducted in a simple manner, and it
       is initiated either at the instance of an accuser, or of an informer actuated by zeal, or by
       reason of a general outcry and rumour; therefore the Judge should try to avoid the first
       method of beginning the action, namely, at the instance of an accusing party. For the deeds
       of witches in conjunction with devils are done in secret, and the accuser cannot in this case,
       as in others, have definite evidence by which he can make his statements good; therefore the
       Judge ought to advise the accuser to set aside his formal accusation and to speak rather as an
       informer, because of the grave danger that is incurred by an accuser. And so he can proceed
       in the second manner, which is commonly used, and likewise in the third manner, in which
       the process is begun not at the instance of any party.
             It is to be noted that we have already said that the Judge ought particularly to ask the
       informer who shares or could share in his knowledge of the case. Accordingly the Judge
       should call as witnesses those whom the informer names, who seem to have most
       knowledge of the matter, and their names shall be entered by the scribe. After this the Judge,
       having regard to the fact that the aforesaid denunciation of heresy involves of its very nature
       such a grave charge that it cannot and must not be lightly passed over, since to do so would
       imply an offence to the Divine Majesty and an injury to the Catholic Faith and to the State,
       shell proceed to inform himself and examine the witnesses in the following manner.


file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_06a.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:04:01 PM]
Part III, Second Head, Question VI

                                                      Examination of Witnesses.

             The witness N., of such a place, was called, sworn, and questioned whether he knew N.
       (naming the accused), and answered that he did. Asked how he knew him, he answered that
       he had seen and spoken with him on several occasions, or that they had been comrades (so
       explaining his reason for knowing him). Asked for how long he had known him, he
       answered, for ten or for so many years. Asked concerning his reputation, especially in
       matter concerning the faith, he answered that in his morals he was a good (or bad) man, but
       with regard to his faith, there was a report in such a place that he used certain practices
       contrary to the Faith, as a witch. Asked what was the report, he made answer. Asked
       whether he had seen or heard him doing such things, he again answered accordingly. Asked
       where he had heard him use such words, he answered, in such a place. Asked in whose
       presence, he answered, in the presence of such and such.
             Further, he was asked whether any of the accused's kindred had formerly been burned
       as witches, or had been suspected, and he answered. Asked whether he associated with
       suspected witches, he answered. Asked concerning the manner and reason of the accused's
       alleged words, he answered, for such a reason and in such a manner. Asked whether he
       thought that the prisoner had used those words carelessly, unmeaningly and thoughtlessly,
       or rather with deliberate intention, he answered that he had used them jokingly or in temper,
       or without meaning or believing what he said, or else with deliberate intention.
             Asked further how he could distinguish the accused's motive, he answered that he knew
       it because he had spoken with a laugh.
             This is a matter which must be inquired into very diligently; for very often people use
       words quoting someone else, or merely in temper, or as a test of the opinions of other
       people; although sometimes they are used assertively with definite intention.
             He was further asked whether he made this deposition out of hatred or rancour, or
       whether he had suppressed anything out of favour or love, and he answered, etc. Following
       this, he as enjoined to preserve secrecy. This was done at such a place on such a day in the
       presence of such witnesses called and questioned, and of me the Notary or scribe.
             Here it must always be noted that in such an examination at least five persons must be
       present, namely, the presiding Judge, the witness of informer, the respondent or accused,
       who appears afterwards, and the third is the Notary or scribe: where there is no Notary the
       scribe shall co-opt another honest man, and these two, as has been said, shall perform the
       duties of the Notary; and this is provided for by Apostolic authority, as was shown above,
       that in this kind of action two honest men should perform as it were the duty of witnesses of
       the depositions.
             Also it must be noted that when a witness is called he must also be sworn, that is, he
       must take the oath in the manner we have shown; otherwise he would falsely be described as
       called and sworn.
             In the same way the other witnesses are to be examined. And after this the Judge shall
       decide whether the fact is fully proven; and if not fully, whether there are great indications
       and strong suspicions of its truth. Observe that we do not speak of a light suspicion, arising
       from slight conjectures, but of a persistent report that the accused has worked witchcraft
       upon children or animals, etc. Then, if the Judge fears the escape of the accused, he shall
       cause him or her to be placed in custody; but if he does not fear his escape, he shall have


file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_06a.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:04:01 PM]
Part III, Second Head, Question VI

       him called for examination. But whether or not he places him in custody, he shall first cause
       his house to be searched unexpectedly, and all chests to be opened and all boxes in the
       corners, and all implements of witchcraft which are found to be taken away. And having
       done this, the Judge shall compare together everything of which he has been convicted or
       suspected by the evidence of witnesses, and conduct an interrogatory on them, having with
       him a Notary, etc., as above, and having caused the accused to swear by the four Gospels of
       God to speak the truth concerning both himself and others. And they shall all be written
       down in this following manner.

                    The General Examination of a Witch or Wizard: and it is the First Action.

             The accused N. of such a place was sworn by personally touching the four Gospels of
       God to speak the truth concerning both himself and others, and was then asked whence he
       was and from where he originated. And he answered, from such a place in such a Diocese.
       Asked who were his parents, and whether they were alive or dead, he answered that they
       were alive in such a place, or dead in such a place.
             Asked whether they died a natural death, or were burned, he answered in such a way.
       (Here note that this question is put because, as was shown in the Second Part of this work,
       witches generally offer or devote their own children to devils, and commonly their whole
       progeny is infected; and when the informer has deposed to this effect, and the witch herself
       has denied it, it lays her open to suspicion).
             Asked where he was brought up, and where he chiefly lived, he answered, in such or
       such a place. And if it appears that he has changed abode because, perhaps, his mother or
       any of his kindred was not suspected, and had lived in foreign districts, especially in such
       places as are most frequented by witches, he shall be questioned accordingly.
             Asked why he had moved from his birthplace and gone to live in such or such a place,
       he answered, for such a reason. Asked whether in those said places or elsewhere he had
       heard any talk of witches, as, for example, the stirring up of tempests, the bewitching of
       cattle, the depriving of cows of their milk, or any such matter of which he was accused; if he
       should answer that he had, he must be asked what he had heard, and all that he says must be
       written down. But if he denies it, and says that he has heard nothing, then he must be asked
       whether he believes that there are such things as witches, and that such things as were
       mentioned could be done, as that tempests could be raised or men and animals bewitched.
             Not that for the most part witches deny this at first; and therefore this engenders a
       greater suspicion than if they were to answer that they left it to a superior judgement to say
       whether there were such or not. So if they deny it, they must be questioned as follows: Then
       are they innocently condemned when they are burned? And he or she must answer.

                                            The Particular Examination of the Same.

            Let the Judge take care not to delay the following questions, but to proceed at once
       with them. Let he be asked why the common people fear her, and whether she knows that
       she is defamed and hated, and why she had threatened such a person, saying, “You shall not
       cross me with impunity,” and let her answers be noted.
            Then let he be asked what harm that person had done her, that she should have used


file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_06a.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:04:01 PM]
Part III, Second Head, Question VI

       such words to threaten him with injury. And note that this question is necessary in order to
       arrive at the cause of their enmity, for in the end the accused will allege that the informer
       has spoken out of enmity; but when this is not mortal, but only a womanish quarrel, it is no
       impediment. For this is a common custom of witches, to stir up enmity against themselves
       by some word or action, as, for example, to ask someone to lend them something or else
       they will damage his garden, or something of that sort, in order to make an occasion for
       deeds of witchcraft; and they manifest themselves either in word or in action, since they are
       compelled to do so at the instance of the devils, so that in this way the sins of Judges are
       aggravated while the witch remains unpunished.
             For note that they do not do such things in the presence of others, so that if the informer
       wishes to produce witnesses he cannot do so. Note again that they are spurred on by the
       devils, as we have learned from many witches who have afterwards been burned; so that
       often they have to work witchcraft against their own wills.
             Further, she was asked how the effect could follow from those threats, as that a child or
       animal should so quickly be bewitched, and she answered. Asked, “Why did you say that he
       would never know a day of health, and it was so?” she answered. And if she denies
       everything, let her be asked concerning other bewitchments, alleged by other witnesses,
       upon cattle or children. Asked why she was seen in the fields or in the stable with the cattle,
       and touching them, as is sometimes their custom, she answered.
             Asked why she touched a child, and afterwards it fell sick, she answered. Also she was
       asked what she did in the fields at the time of a tempest, and so with many other matters.
       Again, why, having one or two cows, she had more milk than her neighbours who had four
       or six. Again, let her be asked why she persists in a state of adultery or concubinage; for
       although this is beside the point, yet such questions engender more suspicion than would the
       case with a chaste and honest woman who stood accused.
             And not that she is to be continually questioned as to the depositions which have been
       laid against her, to see whether she always returns the same answers or not. And when this
       examination has been completed, whether her answers have been negative, or affirmative, or
       ambiguous, let them be written down: Executed in such a place, etc., as above.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                             Question VII

                                                        Main Index


                                                Part III, Second Head, Question VI
                                               was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_06a.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:04:01 PM]
Part III, Second Head, Question VII


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                      PART III, SECOND HEAD, QUESTION VII.
In Which Various Doubts are Set Forth with Regard to the Foregoing Questions and Negative Answers.
Whether the Accused is to be Imprisoned, and when she is to be considered Manifestly Taken in the Foul
                            Heresy of Witchcraft. This is the Second Action

             It is asked first what is to be done when, as often happens, the accused denies
       everything. We answer that the Judge has three points to consider, namely, her bad
       reputation, the evidence of the fact, and the words of the witnesses; and he must see whether
       all these agree together. And if, as very often is the case, they do not altogether agree
       together, since witches are variously accused of different deeds committed in some village
       or town; but the evidences of the fact are visible to the eye, as that a child has been harmed
       by sorcery, or, more often, a beast has been bewitched or deprived of its milk; and it a
       number of witnesses have come forward whose evidence, even if it show certain
       discrepancies (as that one should say she had bewitched his child, another his beast, and a
       third should merely witness to her reputation, and so with the others), but nevertheless agree
       in the substance of the fact, that is, as to the witchcraft, and that she is suspected of being a
       witch; although those witnesses are not enough to warrant a conviction without the fact of
       the general report, or even with that fact, as was shown above at the end of Question III, yet,
       taken in conjunction with the visible and tangible evidence of the fact, the Judge may, in
       consideration of these three points together, decide that the accused is to be reputed, not as
       strongly or gravely under suspicion (which suspicions will be explained later), but as
       manifestly taken in the heresy of witchcraft; provided, that is, that the witnesses are of a
       suitable condition and have not given evidence out of enmity, and that a sufficient number
       of them, say six or eight or ten, have agreed together under oath. And then, according to the
       Canon Law, he must subject her to punishment, whether she has confessed her crime or not.
       And this is proved as follows.
             For since it is said, that when all three of the above considerations are in agreement,
       then she should be thought to be manifestly taken in heresy, it must not be understood that it
       is necessary for all three to be in agreement, but only that if this is the case the proof is all
       the stronger. For either one instance by itself of the following two circumstances, namely,
       the evidence of the fact and the production of legitimate witnesses, is sufficient to cause a
       person to be reputed as manifestly taken in heresy; and all the more when both these
       considerations are in agreement.
             For when the Jurists ask in how many ways a person may be considered as manifestly
       taken in heresy, we answer that there are three ways, as S. Bernard has explained. This
       matter was treated of above in the First Question at the beginning of this work, namely, the
       evidence of the fact, when a person has publicly preacher heresy. But here we consider the
       evidence of the fact provided by public threats uttered by the accused, as when she said,
       “You shall have no healthy days,” or some such thing, and the threatened effect has

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_07a.html (1 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:04:02 PM]
Part III, Second Head, Question VII

       followed. The other two ways are the legitimate proof of the case by witnesses, and thirdly
       by her own confession. Therefore, if each of these singly is sufficient to cause a person to be
       manifestly suspected, how much more is this the case when the reputation of the accused,
       the evidence of the fact, and the depositions of witnesses all together point to the same
       conclusion. It is true that S. Bernard speaks of an evident fact, and we here speak of the
       evidence of the fact; but this is because the devil does not work openly, but secretly.
       Therefore the injuries and the instruments of witchcraft which are found constitute the
       evidence of the fact. And whereas in other heresies an evident fact is alone sufficient, here
       we join three proofs together.
             Secondly, it is thus proved that a person so taken is to be punished according to the
       law, even though she denies the accusation. For a person taken on the evidence of the fact,
       or on the depositions of witnesses, either confesses the crime or does not. If he confesses
       and is impenitent, he is to be handed over to the secular courts to suffer the extreme penalty,
       according to the chapter ad abolendam, or he is to be imprisoned for life, according to the
       chapter excommunicamus. But if he does not confess, and stoutly maintains his denial, he is
       to be delivered as an impenitent to the power of the Civil Court to be punished in a fitting
       manner, as Henry of Segusio shows in his Summa, where he treats of the manner of
       proceeding against heretics.
             It is therefore concluded that it is most just if the Judge proceeds in that manner with
       his questions and the depositions of witnesses, since, as has been said, he can in a case
       concerning the Faith conduct matters quite plainly and in a short and summary manner; and
       it is meet that he should consign the accused to prison for a time, or for several years, in case
       perhaps, being depressed after a year of the squalor of prison, she may confess her crimes.
             But, lest it should seem that he arrives at his sentence precipitately, and to show that he
       proceeds with all equity, let us inquire into what should next be done.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                            Question VIII

                                                        Main Index


                                                Part III, Second Head, Question VII
                                               was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_07a.html (2 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:04:02 PM]
Part III, Second Head, Question VIII


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                       PART III, SECOND HEAD, QUESTION VIII.
Which Follows from the Preceding Question, Whether the Witch is to be Imprisoned, and of the Method
                        of Taking her. This is the Third Action of the Judge

             It is asked whether, after she has denied the accusation, the witch ought to be kept in
       custody in prison, when the three aforesaid conditions, namely, her reputation, the evidence
       of the fact, and the depositions of witnesses, are in agreement; or whether she should be
       dismissed with the security of sureties, so that she may again be called and questioned. As to
       this question there are three opinions.
             First, it is the opinion of some that she should be sent to prison, and that by no means
       ought she to be dismissed under bond; and they hold this opinion on the strength of the
       reasoning brought forward in the preceding question, namely, that she is to be considered as
       manifestly guilty when all those three considerations are in agreement.
             Others, again, think that before she is imprisoned she may be dismissed with the
       safeguard of sureties; so that if she makes her escape, she can then be considered as
       convicted. But after she has been imprisoned because of her negative answers, she is not to
       be released under any safeguard or condition of bail, that is, when those three considerations
       noted above are in agreement; because in that case she could not subsequently be sentenced
       and punished by death; and this, they say, is the general custom.
             The third opinion is that no definite rule can be given, but that it must be left to the
       Judge to act in accordance with the gravity of the matter as shown by the testimony of the
       witnesses, the reputation of the accused, and the evidence as to the fact, and the extent to
       which these three agree with each other; and that he should follow the custom of the
       country. And they who hold this opinion conclude by saying that if reputable and
       responsible sureties are not to be procured, and the accused is suspected of contemplating
       flight, she should then be cast into prison. And this third opinion seems to be the most
       reasonable, as long as the correct procedure if observed; and this consists in three things.
             First, that her house should be searched as thoroughly as possible, in all holes and
       corners and chests, top and bottom; and if she is a noted witch, then without doubt, unless
       she has previously hidden them, there will be found various instruments of witchcraft, as we
       have shown above.
             Secondly, if she has a maid-servant or companions, that she or they should be shut up
       by themselves; for though they are not accused, yet it is presumed that none of the accused's
       secrets are hidden from them.
             Thirdly, in taking her, if she be taken in her own house, let her not be given time to go
       into her room; for they are wont to secure in this way, and bring away with them, some
       object or power of witchcraft which procures them the faculty of keeping silent under
       examination.
             This gives rise to the question whether the method employed by some to capture a

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_08a.html (1 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:02 PM]
Part III, Second Head, Question VIII

       witch is lawful, namely, that she should be lifted from the ground by the officers, and
       carried out in a basket or on a plank of wood so that she cannot again touch the ground. This
       can be answered by the opinion of the Canonists and of certain Theologians, that this is
       lawful in three respects. First, because, as is shown in the introductory question of this Third
       Part, it is clear from the opinion of many authorities, and especially of such Doctors as no
       one would dare to dispute, as Duns Scotus, Henry of Segusio and Godfrey of Fontaines, that
       it is lawful to oppose vanity with vanity. Also we know from experience and the confessions
       of witches that when they are taken in this manner they more often lose the power of
       keeping silence under examination: indeed many who have been about to be burned have
       asked that they might be allowed at least to touch the ground with one foot; and when this
       has been asked why they made such a request, they have answered that if they had touched
       the ground they would have liberated themselves, striking many other people dead with
       lightning.
              The second reason is this. It was manifestly shown in the Second Part of this work that
       a witch loses all her power when she falls into the hands of public justice, that is, with
       regard to the past; but with regard to the future, unless she receives from the devil fresh
       powers of keeping silent, she will confess all her crimes. Therefore let us say with S. Paul:
       Whatsoever we do in word or deed, let all be done in the name of the Lord JESUS Christ.
       And if the witch be innocent, this form of capture will not harm her.
              Thirdly, according to the Doctors it is lawful to counteract witchcraft by vain means;
       for they all agree as to this, though they are at variance over the question as to when those
       vain means may also be unlawful. Therefore when Henry of Segusio says that it is lawful to
       oppose vanity with vanity, this is explained as meaning that he speaks of vain means, not of
       unlawful means. All the more, then, is it lawful to obstruct witchcraft; and it is this
       obstruction which is referred to here, and not any unlawful practice.
              Let the Judge note also that there are two sorts of imprisonment; one being a
       punishment inflicted upon criminals, but the other only a matter of custody in the house of
       detention. And these two sorts are noted in the chapter multorum querela; therefore she
       ought at least to be placed in custody. But if it is only a slight matter of which she is
       accused, and she is not of bad reputation, and there is no evidence of her work upon children
       or animals, then she may be sent back to her house. But because she has certainly associated
       with witches and knows their secrets, she must give sureties; and if she cannot do so, she
       must be bound by oaths and penalties not to go out of her house unless she is summoned.
       But her servants and domestics, of whom we spoke above, must be kept in custody, yet not
       punished.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                              Question IX

                                                        Main Index


                                                 Part III, Second Head, Question VIII


file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_08a.html (2 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:02 PM]
Part III, Second Head, Question VIII

                                               was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_08a.html (3 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:02 PM]
Notes

            “House should be searched.” Thus in the famouse witch trial of Dame Alive Kyteler and
        her coven before the Bishop of Ossory in 1324, John le Poer, the husband of Dame Alice,
        deposed that in her closet were discovered mysterious vials and elixirs, strange necromantic
        instruments and ghastly relics of mortality which she used in her horrid craft. Holinshed in
        his “Chronicle of Ireland” (London, 1587, p. 93), sub anno 1323, has: “In rifling the closet
        of the ladie, they found a wafer of sacramental bread, having the divels name stamped
        thereon in steed of JESUS Christ, and a pipe of ointment, wherewith she greased a staffe,
        upon whish she ambled and gallopped through thicke and thin when and in what manner
        she listed.” See my “Geography of Witchcraft,” Chap. II, pp. 85-91.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/notes/n3007.html [2002-01-20 12:04:02 PM]
Notes

           “S. Paul.” “Colossians” iii, 17.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/notes/n3008.html [2002-01-20 12:04:03 PM]
Part III, Second Head, Question IX


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                       PART III, SECOND HEAD, QUESTION IX.
What is to be done after the Arrest, and whether the Names of the Witnesses should be made Known to
                                the Accused. This is the Fourth Action

             THERE are two matters to be attended to after the arrest, but it is left to the Judge
       which shall be taken first; namely, the question of allowing the accused to be defended, and
       whether she should be examined in the place of torture, though not necessarily in order that
       she should be tortured. The first is only allowed when a direct request is made; the second
       only when her servants and companions, if she has any, have first been examined in the
       house.
             But let us proceed in the order as above. If the accused says that she is innocent and
       falsely accused, and that she wishes to see and hear her accusers, then it is a sign that she is
       asking to defend herself. But it is an open question whether the Judge is bound to make the
       deponents known to her and bring them to confront her face to face. For here let the Judge
       take note that he is not bound either to publish the names of the deponents or to bring them
       before the accused, unless they themselves should freely and willingly offer to come before
       the accused and lay their depositions in her presence And it is by reason of the danger
       incurred by the deponents that the Judge is not bound to do this. For although different
       Popes have had different opinions on this matter, none of them has ever said that in such a
       case the Judge is bound to make known to the accused the names of the informers or
       accusers (but here we are not dealing with the case of an accuser). On the contrary, some
       have thought that in no case ought he to do so, while others have thought that he should in
       certain circumstances.
             But, finally, Bonifice VIII decreed as follows: If in a case of heresy it appear to the
       Bishop or Inquisitor that grave danger would be incurred by the witnesses of informers on
       account of the powers of the persons against whom they lay their depositions, should their
       names be published, he shall not publish them. But if there is no danger, their names shall be
       published just as in other cases.
             Here it is to be noted that this refers not only to a Bishop or Inquisitor, but to any Judge
       conducting a case against witches with the consent of the Inquisitor or Bishop; for, as was
       shown in the introductory Question, they can depute their duties to a Judge. So that any such
       Judge, even if he be secular, has the authority of the Pope, and not only of the Emperor.
             Also a careful Judge will take notice of the powers of the accused persons; for these are
       of three kinds, namely, the power of birth and family, the power of riches, and the power of
       malice. And the last of these is more to be feared than the other two, since it threatens more
       danger to the witnesses if their names are made known to the accused. The reason for this is
       that it is more dangerous to make known the names of the witnesses to an accused person
       who is poor, because such a person has many evil accomplices, such as outlaws and
       homicides, associated with him, who venture nothing but their own persons, which is not the

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_09a.html (1 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:03 PM]
Part III, Second Head, Question IX

       case with anyone who is nobly born or rich, and abounding in temporal possessions. And the
       kind of danger which is to be feared is explained by Pope John XXII as the death of cutting
       off of themselves or their children or kindred, or the wasting of their substance, or some
       such matter.
             Further, let the Judge take notice that, as he acts in this matter with the authority of the
       Supreme Pontiff and the permission of the Ordinary, both he himself and all who are
       associated with him at the depositions, or afterwards at the pronouncing of the sentence,
       must keep the names of the witnesses secret, under pain of excommunication. And it is in
       the power of the Bishop thus to punish him or them if they do otherwise. Therefore he
       should very implicitly warn them not to reveal the name from the very beginning of the
       process.
             Wherefore the above decrees of Pope Bonifice VIII goes on to say: And that the danger
       to those accusers and witnesses may be the more effectively met, and the inquiry conducted
       more cautiously, we permit, by the authority of this statute, that the Bishop or Inquisitors
       (or, as we have said, the Judge) shall forbid all those who are concerned in the inquiry to
       reveal without their permission any secrets which they have learned from the Bishop or
       Inquisitors, under pain of excommunication, which they may incur by violating such secrets.
             It is further to be noted that just as it is a punishable offence to publish the names of
       witnesses indiscreetly, so also it is to conceal them without good reason from, for instance,
       such people as have a right to know them, such as the lawyers and assessors whose opinion
       is to be sought in proceeding to the sentence; in the same way the names must not be
       concealed when it is possible to publish them without risk of any danger to the witnesses.
       On this subject the above decree speaks as follows, towards the end: We command that in
       all cases the Bishop or Inquisitors shall take especial care not to suppress the names of the
       witnesses as if there were danger to them when there is perfect security, not conversely to
       decide to publish them when there is some danger threatened, the decision in this matter
       resting with their own conscience and discretion. And it has been written in comment on
       these words: Whoever you are who are a Judge in such a case, mark those words well, for
       they do not refer to a slight risk but to a grave danger; therefore do not deprive a prisoner of
       his legal rights without very good cause, for this cannot but be an offence to Almighty God.
             The reader must note that all the process which we have already described, and all that
       we have yet to describe, up to the methods of passing sentence (except the death sentence),
       which it is in the province of the ecclesiastical Judge to conduct, can also, with the consent
       of the Diocesans, be conducted by a secular Judge. Therefore the reader need find no
       difficulty in the fact that the above Decree speaks of an ecclesiastical and not a secular
       Judge; for the latter can take his method of inflicting the death sentence from that of the
       Ordinary in passing sentence of penance.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                              Question X

                                                        Main Index



file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_09a.html (2 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:03 PM]
Part III, Second Head, Question IX


                                                Part III, Second Head, Question IX
                                               was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                          HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998 - 2000 by the Windhaven Network.
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_09a.html (3 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:03 PM]
Notes

            “Bonifice VIII.” Benedetto Gaetani, born at Anagni about 1235; elected Pope, 24
        December, 1294; died at Rome, 11 October, 1303. He was one of the most eminent
        canonists of his age, and as Supreme Pontiff enriched legislation by the promulgation (Bull
        “Sacrosanctae,” 1298) of a large number of his own constitutions and those of his
        predecessors since 1234, when Gregory IX issued his five books of Decretals. In reference
        to this, the collection of Bonifice VIII is known as “Liber Sixtus,” i.e. of Pontifical
        Constitutions.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/notes/n3009.html [2002-01-20 12:04:03 PM]
Part III, Second Head, Question X


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                        PART III, SECOND HEAD, QUESTION X.
What Kind of Defence may be Allowed, and of the Appointment of an Advocate. This is the Fifth Action

             IF, therefore, the accused asked to be defended, how can this be admitted when the
       names of the witnesses are kept altogether secret? It is to be said that three considerations
       are to be observed in admitting any defence. First, that an Advocate shall be allotted to the
       accused. Second, that the names of the witnesses shall not be made known to the Advocate,
       even under an oath of secrecy, but that he shall be informed of everything contained in the
       depositions. Third, the accused shall as far as possible be given the benefit of every doubt,
       provided that this involves no scandal to the faith nor is in any way detrimental to justice, as
       will be shown. And in like manner the prisoner’s procurator shall have full access to the
       whole process, only the names of the witnesses and deponents being suppressed; and the
       Advocate can act also in the name of procurator.
             As to the first of these points: it should be noted that an Advocate is not to be appointed
       at the desire of the accused, as if he may choose which Advocate he will have; but the Judge
       must take great care to appoint neither a litigious nor an evil-minded man, nor yet one who
       is easily bribed (as many are), but rather an honourable man to whom no sort of suspicion
       attaches.
             And the Judge ought to note four points, and if the Advocate be found to conform to
       them, he shall be allowed to plead, but not otherwise. For first of all the Advocate must
       examine the nature of the case, and then if he finds it a just one he may undertake it, but if
       he finds it unjust he must refuse it; and he must be very careful not to undertake an unjust or
       desperate case. But if he has unwittingly accepted the brief, together with a fee, from
       someone who wishes to do him an injury, but discovers during the process that the case is
       hopeless, then he must signify to his client (that is, the accused) that he abandons the case,
       and must return the fee which he has received. This is the opinion of Godfrey of Fontaines,
       which is wholly in conformity with the Canon de jud. i, rem non novam. But Henry of
       Segusio holds an opposite view concerning the return of the fee in a case in which the
       Advocate has worked very hard. Consequently if an Advocate has wittingly undertaken to
       defend a prisoner whom he knows to be guilty, he shall be liable for the costs and expenses
       (de admin. tut. i, non tamen est ignotum).
             The second point to be observed is that in his pleading he should conduct himself
       properly in three respects. First, his behaviour must be modest and free from prolixity or
       pretentious oratory. Secondly, he must abide by the truth, not bringing forward any
       fallacious arguments or reasoning, or calling false witnesses, or introducing legal quirks and
       quibbles if he be a skilled lawyer, or bringing counter-accusations; especially in cases of this
       sort, which must be conducted as simply and summarily as possible. Thirdly, his fee must be
       regulated by the usual practice of the district.
             But to return to our point; the Judge must make the above conditions clear to the

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_10a.html (1 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:04:04 PM]
Part III, Second Head, Question X

       Advocate, and finally admonish him not to incur the charge of defending heresy, which
       would make him liable to excommunication.
             And it is not a valid argument for him to say to the Judge that he is not defending the
       error, but the person. For he must not by any means so conduct his defence as to prevent the
       case from being conducted in a plain and summary manner, and he would be doing so if he
       introduced any complications or appeals into it; all which things are disallowed together.
       For it is granted that he does not defend the error; for in that case he would be more
       damnably guilty than the witches themselves, and rather a heresiarch than a heretical wizard.
       Nevertheless, if he unduly defends a person already suspect of heresy, he makes himself as
       it were a patron of that heresy, and lays himself under not only a light but a strong suspicion,
       in accordance with the manner of his defence; and ought publicly to abjure that heresy
       before the Bishop.
             We have put this matter at some length, and it is not to be neglected by the Judge,
       because much danger may arise from an improper conducting of the defence by an
       Advocate or Procurator. Therefore, when there is any objection to the Advocate, the Judge
       must dispense with him and proceed in accordance with the facts and the proofs. But when
       the Advocate for the accused is not open to any objection, but is a zealous man and lover of
       justice, then the Judge may reveal to him the names of the witnesses, under an oath of
       secrecy.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                              Question XI

                                                        Main Index


                                                  Part III, Second Head, Question X
                                                  was transcribed by Christie Rice.

                           HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network.
                                                 All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_10a.html (2 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:04:04 PM]
Part III, Second Head, Question XI


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                       PART III, SECOND HEAD, QUESTION XI.
What Course the Advocate should Adopt when the Names of the Witnesses are not Revealed to him. Ths
                                         Sixth Action

            BUT it may be asked: What, then, should the Advocate acting a Procurator for the
       accused do, when the names of the witnesses are withheld from both himself and his client,
       although the accused earnestly desires that they should be made known? We answer that he
       should obtain information from the Judge on every point of the accusation, which must be
       given to him at his request, only the names of the witnesses being suppressed; and with this
       information he should approach the accused and, if the matter involves a very grave charge,
       exhort him to exercise all the patience which he can.
            And if the accused again and again insists that she should know the names of the
       witnesses against her, he can answer her as follows: You can guess from the charges which
       are made against you who are the witnesses. For the child or beast of so and so has been
       bewitched; or to such a woman or man, because they refused to lend you something for
       which you asked, you said, "You shall know that it would have been better to have agreed to
       my request," and they bear witness that in consequence of your words the person was
       suddenly taken ill; and facts are stronger evidence than words. And you know that you have
       a bad reputation, and have for a long time been suspected of casting spells upon and injuring
       many men. And talking in this manner, he may finally induce her to enter a plea that they
       had borne witness against her from motives of hatred; or to say, "I confess that I did say so,
       but not with any intent to do harm."
            Therefore the Advocate must first lay before the Judge and his assessors this plea of
       personal enmity, and the Judge must inquire into it. And if it should be found to be a case of
       mortal enmity, as that there has been some attempted or accomplished murder committed by
       the husbands or kindred of the parties, or that someone of one party has been charged with a
       crime by someone of the other party, so that he fell into the hands of public justice, or that
       serious wounds have resulted from quarrels and brawls between them; then the upright and
       careful Judge will consult with his assessors whether the accused of the deponent was the
       aggravating party. For if, for example, the husband or friends of the accused have unjustly
       oppressed the friends of the deponent, then if there is no evidence of the fact that children or
       animals or men have been bewitched, and if there are no other witnesses, and the accused is
       not even commonly suspected of witchcraft, in that case it is presumed that the depositions
       were laid against her from motives of vengeance, and she is to be discharged as innocent
       and freely dismissed, after having been duly cautioned against seeking to avenge herself, in
       the manner which is usually used by Judges.
            The following case may be put. Katharina’s child, or she herself, is bewitched, or she
       has suffered much loss of her cattle; and she suspects the accused because her husband or
       brothers had previously brought on an unjust accusation against her own husband or brother.

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_11a.html (1 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:04 PM]
Part III, Second Head, Question XI

       Here the cause of enmity is twofold on the part of the deponent, having its root both in her
       own bewitchment and in the unjust accusation brought against her husband or brother. Then
       ought her deposition to be rejected or not? From one point of view it seems that it should,
       because she is actuated by enmity; from another point of view it should not, because there is
       the evidence of the fact in her bewitchment.
             We answer that if in this case there are no other deponents, and the accused is not even
       under common suspicion, then her depositions cannot be allowed, but must be rejected; but
       if the accused is rendered suspect, and if the disease is not due to natural causes but to
       witchcraft (and we shall show later how this can be distinguished), she is to be subjected to
       a canonical purgation.
             If it be asked further whether the other deponents must bear witness to the evidence of
       the fact as experienced by themselves or others, or only to the public reputation of the
       accused; we answer that, if they give evidence of the fact, so much the better. But if they
       only give evidence as to her general character, and the matter stands so, then, although the
       Judge must reject that deponent on the grounds of personal enmity, yet he shall take the
       evidence of the fact, and of her bad reputation given by the other witnesses, as proof that the
       accused must be strongly suspect, and on these grounds he can sentence her to a threefold
       punishment: namely, to a canonical purgation because of her reputation; or to an abjuration,
       because of the suspicion under which she rests, and there are various forms of abjuration for
       various degrees of suspicion, as will be shown in the fourth method of passing sentence; or,
       because of the evidence of the fact, and if she confesses her crime and is penitent, she shall
       not be handed over to the secular branch for capital punishment, but be sentenced by the
       ecclesiastical Judge to imprisonment for life. But notwithstanding the fact that she has been
       sentenced to imprisonment for life by the ecclesiastical Judge, the secular Judge can, on
       account of the temporal injuries which she has committed, deliver her to be burned. But all
       these matters will be made clear later when we deal with the sixth method of passing
       sentence.
             To sum up: Let the Judge first take care not to lend too easy belief to the Advocate
       when he pleads mortal enmity on behalf of the accused; for in these cases it is very seldom
       that anyone bears witness without enmity, because witches are always hated by everybody.
       Secondly, let him take note that there are four ways by which a witch can be convicted,
       namely, by witnesses, by direct evidence of the fact, and by her own confession. And if she
       is detained on account of a general report, she can be convicted by the evidence of
       witnesses; if on account of definite suspicion, the direct or indirect evidence of the facts can
       convict her, and by reason of these the suspicion may be judged to be either light or strong
       or grave. All this is when she does not confess; but when she does, the case can proceeds as
       has been said.
             Thirdly, let the Judge make use of all the foregoing circumstances to meet the plea of
       the Advocate, whether the accused is charged only by reason of a general report, or whether
       there are also certain evidences to support the charge by which she incurs slight or strong
       suspicion; and then he will be able to answer the Advocate’s allegation of personal enmity,
       which is the first line of defence which he may assume.
             But when the Advocate assumes the second line of defence, admitting that the accused
       has used such words against the deponent as, "You shall soon know what is going to happen
       to you," or "You will wish soon enough that you had lent or sold me what I asked for," or
       some such words; and submits that, although the deponent afterwards experienced some

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_11a.html (2 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:04 PM]
Part III, Second Head, Question XI

       injury either to this person or his property, yet it does not follow from this that the accused
       was the cause of it as a witch, for illnesses may be due to various different causes. Also he
       submits that it is a common habit of women to quarrel together with such words, etc.
             The Judge ought to answer such allegations in the following manner. If the illness is
       due to natural causes, then the excuse is good. But the evidence indicates the contrary; for it
       cannot be cured by any natural remedy; or in the opinion of the physicians the illness is due
       to witchcraft, or is what is in common speech called a Night-scathe. Again, perhaps other
       enchantresses are of the opinion that it is due to witchcraft. Or because it came suddenly,
       without any previous sickening, whereas natural diseases generally develop gradually. Or
       perhaps because the plaintiff had found certain instruments of witchcraft under his bed or in
       his clothes or elsewhere, and when these were removed he was suddenly restored to health,
       as often happens, as we showed in the Second Part of this work where we treated of
       remedies. And by some such answer as this the Judge can easily meet this allegation, and
       show that the illness was due rather to witchcraft than to any natural causes, and that the
       accused must be suspected of causing such witchcraft, by reason of her threatening words.
       In the same way, if someone said, "I wish your barn would be burned down," and this
       should afterwards happen, it would engender a grave suspicion that the person who had used
       that threat had caused the barn to be set on fire, even if another person, and not he himself,
       had actually set light to it.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                             Question XII

                                                        Main Index


                                                 Part III, Second Head, Question XI
                                                  was transcribed by Christie Rice.

                           HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network.
                                                 All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_11a.html (3 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:04 PM]
Part III, Second Head, Question XII


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                      PART III, SECOND HEAD, QUESTION XII.
     Of the Same Matter, Declaring more Particularly how the Question of Personal Enmity is to be
                                   Investigated. The Seventh Action

             TAKE notice that only mortal enemies are debarred from giving evidence, as was
       shown in the Fifth Question. But the Judge may consider that to come to a decision about
       such enmity by the means we have just explained is rather dubious and unsatisfactory; and
       the accused or her Procurator may not be willing to accept a decision arrived at on such
       grounds as to whether the enmity is mortal or not. Therefore the Judge must use other means
       to decide concerning the alleged enmity, so that he may not punish the innocent, but exact
       full justice from the guilty. And though these means may savour of cunning and even guile,
       yet the Judge may employ them for the good of the faith and the State; for even S. Paul says:
       But being crafty, I caught you by guile. And these means are especially to be employed in
       the case of a prisoner who has not been publically defamed, and is not suspected because of
       the evidence of any fact; and the Judge may also employ them against prisoners who have
       alleged enmity on the part of the deponents, and wish to know all the names of the
       witnesses.
             The first method is this. The accused or her Advocate is given a copy of the process
       with the names of the deponents or informers, but not in the order in which they deposed;
       but in such a way that the name of the witness who comes first in the copy is sixth or
       seventh in the schedule, and he who comes second is last or last but one. In this way the
       accused will be deceived as to which witness deposed this or that. And then she will either
       say that they are all her enemies, or not; and if she says that they all are, she will be more
       easily detected in a lie when the cause of the enmity is investigated by the Judge; and if she
       names only certain ones, still the cause of the enmity will be more easily investigated.
             The second method is similar, when the Advocate is given a copy of the process, and
       separately a list of the names of the deponents; but there are added other matters perpetrated
       elsewhere by witches, but not set down in writing by the witnesses or deponents. And so the
       accused will not be able to say definitely that this one or that one is her mortal enemy,
       because she does not know what they have deposed against her.
             The third method was touched upon in the Fifth Question above. For when the accused
       is questioned at the end of her second examination, and before she has demanded to be
       defended or an Advocate has been allotted to her, let her be asked whether she thinks that
       she has any mortal enemies who, setting aside all fear of God, would falsely accuse her of
       the crime of heresy and witchcraft. And then perhaps without thinking, and not having seen
       the depositions of the witnesses, she will answer that she does not think that she has any
       such enemies. Or if she says, “I think I have,” and names any of the witnesses who have laid
       information, and the reason for that enmity is known, then the Judge will be able to
       investigate it with more certainty afterwards, when the accused has been given separate

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_12a.html (1 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:05 PM]
Part III, Second Head, Question XII

       copies of the process and of the names of the witnesses, in the manner we have explained.
             The fourth method is this. At the end of her second examination and confession (as we
       showed in the Sixth Question), before she is granted any means of defence, let her be
       questioned as to the witnesses who have laid the more serious charges against her, in this
       manner. “Do you know So-and-so?• naming one of the witnesses; and then she will answer
       either Yes or No. If she says No, she will not be able, after she has been given means of
       defence and an Advocate, to plead that he is a mortal enemy, since she has said on oath that
       she does not know him. But if she says Yes, let her be asked whether she knows or has
       heard that he or she has acted in any way contrary to the Christian faith in the manner of a
       witch. Then if she says Yes, for he did such and such a thing; let her be asked whether he is
       her friend or enemy; and she will immediately answer that he is her friend, because of the
       testimony of such is not of very great account; and consequently she will not be able
       afterwards to plead an oath through her Advocate that he is her enemy, for she has already
       said that he is her friend. But if she answers that she knows nothing about him, let her again
       be asked whether he is her friend or enemy, and she will at once answer that he is her friend;
       for it would be futile to allege enmity on the part of someone of whom she knows nothing.
       Therefore she says, “I am his friend, but if I knew anything about him I would not fail to
       reveal it.” Therefore she will not be able afterwards to plead that her is her enemy. Or
       perhaps she will from the very beginning allege reasons for mortal enmity, and in that case
       some credence must be placed in the plea of the Advocate.
             A fifth method is to give the Advocate or the accused a copy of the process, with the
       names of the informers suppressed. And then the accused will guess, and very often rightly,
       who has deposed such and such against her. And then if she says, “So-and-so is my mortal
       enemy, and I am willing to prove it by witnesses,” then the Judge must consider whether the
       person named is the same person named in the schedule, and since she has said that she is
       willing to prove it by witnesses, he will examine those witnesses and inquire into the causes
       of the enmity, having secretly called into consultation learned and aged men of known
       prudence. And if he finds sufficient reasons for mortal enmity, he shall reject that evidence
       and dismiss the prisoner, unless there are other grave charges against her, sworn to by other
       witnesses.
             And this fifth method is commonly used; and it is found in practice that witches
       quickly guess from the copy of the process who has laid information against them. And
       because in such cases mortal enmity is rarely found unless it arises from the wicked deeds of
       the witch, therefore the Judge can easily come to a decision by the above means. Also it is to
       be noted that often the informers desire to confront the witch personally, and to charge her
       to her face with the bewitchment which has befallen them.
             There is still one more method whereunto the Judge may finally have recourse, when
       perhaps the other methods, and especially the first four, seem to some to savour too much of
       cunning and deceit. Accordingly, to satisfy and content the scrupulous, and that no fault may
       be found with the Judge, let him take care, after he has found by the above methods that
       there is no mortal enmity between the accused and the deponent, but wishes to remove all
       grounds for complaint by settling the question finally in consultation with his other
       assessors, to act as follows. Let him give to the accused or her Advocate a copy of the
       process, with the names of the deponents or informers suppressed. And since her defence is
       that she has mortal enemies, and perhaps she has alleged various reasons for the enmity,
       whether or not the facts are in agreement with her statements, let the Judge call into

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_12a.html (2 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:05 PM]
Part III, Second Head, Question XII

       consultation learned men of every faculty (if such can be had), or at least some honest and
       reputable persons (for this is the purport of that statute we have so often quoted); and let him
       cause the whole process to be read through to them from end to end by the Notary or scribe,
       and let the names of the witnesses be made known to them, but under an oath of secrecy;
       and he shall first inquire whether or not they are willing to be bound by such an oath, for if
       not the names must by no means be declared to them.
             Then let him tell how he has inquired in such and such a manner into the alleged
       enmity, and has not been able to find any testimony of fact. But he shall add that, if they
       please, one of two courses shall be pursued. Either they shall decide then and there in
       consultation whether the evidence of any of the witnesses shall be rejected on the grounds of
       mortal personal enmity; or let them choose three or four or five persons who have most
       knowledge in that town or village of any friendship or enmity between the accused and the
       informer, who are not present at the consultation, and let them be informed of the names
       only of the accused and the witness, but not of the information which has been deposed, and
       let the whole question be left to their judgement. If they follow the former of these courses,
       they cannot very well reject any witness, since the Judge has already used his own methods
       of investigation; but by the second course he protects himself perfectly, and clears himself
       of all ugly suspicions. And he ought to observe this last method when the accused has been
       taken in a foreign town or country. These methods will suffice for examining the question of
       personal enmity.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                            Question XIII

                                                        Main Index


                                                Part III, Second Head, Question XII
                                               was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                           HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network.
                                                 All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_12a.html (3 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:05 PM]
Part III, Second Head, Question XIII


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                       PART III, SECOND HEAD, QUESTION XIII.
Of the Points to be Observed by the Judge before the Formal Examination in the Place of Detention and
                                   Torture. This is the Eighth Action

              THE next action of the Judge is quite clear. For common justice demands that a witch
       should not be condemned to death unless she is convicted by her own confession. But here
       we are considering the case of one who is judged to be taken in manifest heresy for one of
       the other two reasons set down in the First Question, namely, direct or indirect evidence of
       the fact, or the legitimate production of witnesses; and in this case she is to be exposed to
       questions and torture to extort a confession of her crimes.
              And to make the matter clear we will quote a case which occurred at Spires and came
       to the knowledge of many. A certain honest man was bargaining with a woman, and would
       not come to terms with her about the price of some article; so she angrily called after him,
       "You will soon wish you had agreed." For witches generally use this manner of speaking, or
       something like it, when they wish to bewitch a person by looking at him. Then he, not
       unreasonably being angry with her, looked over his shoulder to see with what intention she
       had uttered those words; and behold! he was suddenly bewitched so that his mouth was
       stretched sideways as far as his ears in a horrible deformity, and he could not draw it back,
       but remained so deformed for a long time.
              We put this case that this was submitted to the Judge as direct evidence of the fact; and
       it is asked whether the woman is to be considered as manifestly taken in the heresy of
       witchcraft. This should be answered from the words of S. Bernard which we have quoted
       above. For there are three ways in which a person may be judged to be so taken, and they
       not so closely conjoined as though it were necessary for all three to agree in one conclusion,
       but each one by itself, namely, the evidence of the fact, or the legitimate production of
       witnesses, or her own confession, is sufficient to prove a witch to be manifestly taken in that
       heresy.
              But indirect evidence of the fact is different from direct evidence; yet thought it is not
       so conclusive, it is still taken from the words and deeds of witches, as was shown in the
       Seventh Question, and it is judged from witchcraft which is not so immediate in its effect,
       but follows after some lapse of time from the utterance of the threatening words. Wherefore
       may we conclude that this is the case with such witches who have been accused and have
       not made good their defence (or have failed to defend themselves because this privilege was
       not granted them; and it was not granted because they did not ask for it). But what we are to
       consider now is what action the Judge should take, and how he should proceed to question
       the accused with a view to extorting the truth from her so that sentence of death may finally
       be passed upon her.
              And here, because of the great trouble caused by the stubborn silence of witches, there
       are several points which the Judge must notice, and these are dealt with under their several

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_13a.html (1 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:05 PM]
Part III, Second Head, Question XIII

       heads.
             And the first is that he must not be too quick to subject a witch to examination, but
       must pay attention to certain signs which will follow. And he must not be too quick for this
       reason: unless God, through a holy Angel, compels the devil to withhold his help from the
       witch, she will be so insensible to the pains of torture that she will sooner be torn limb from
       limb than confess any of the truth.
             But the torture is not to be neglected for this reason, for they are not all equally
       endowed with this power, and also the devil sometimes of his own will permits them to
       confess their crimes without being compelled by a holy Angel. And for the understanding of
       this the reader is referred to that which is written in the Second Part of this work concerning
       the homage which they offer to the devil.
             For there are some who obtain from the devil a respite of six or eight or ten years
       before they have to offer him their homage, that is, devote themselves to him body and soul;
       whereas others, when they first profess their abjuration of the faith, at the same time offer
       their homage. And the reason why the devil allows that stipulated interval of time is that,
       during that time, he may find out whether the witch has denied the faith with her lips only
       but not in her heart, and would therefore offer him her homage in the same way.
             For the devil cannot know the inner thoughts of the heart except conjecturally from
       outward indications, as we showed in the First Part of this work where we dealt with the
       question whether devils can turn the minds of men to hatred or love. And many have been
       found who, driven by some necessity or poverty, have been induced by other witches, in the
       hope of ultimate forgiveness in confession, to become either total or partial apostates from
       the faith. And it is such whom the devil deserts without any compulsion by a holy Angel;
       and therefore they readily confess their crimes, whereas others, who have from their hearts
       bound themselves to the devil, are protected by his power and preserve a stubborn silence.
             And this provides a clear answer to the question how it comes about that some witches
       readily confess, and others will by no means do so. For in the case of the former, when the
       devil is not compelled by God, he still deserts them of his own will, in order that by
       temporal unhappiness and a horrible death he may lead to despair those over whose hearts
       he could never obtain the mastery. For it is evident from their sacramental confessions that
       they have never voluntarily obeyed the devil, but have been compelled by him to work
       witchcraft.
             And some also are distinguished by the fact that, after they have admitted their crimes,
       they try to commit suicide by strangling or hanging themselves. And they are induced to do
       this by the Enemy, lest they should obtain pardon from God through sacramental confession.
       This chiefly happens in the case of those who have not been willing agents of the devil;
       although it may also happen in the case of willing agents, after they have confessed their
       crimes: but then it is because the devil has been compelled to desert the witch.
             In conclusion we may say that it is as difficult, or more difficult, to compel a witch to
       tell the truth as it is to exorcise a person possessed of the devil. Therefore the Judge ought
       not to be too willing or ready to proceed to such examination, unless, as has been said, the
       death penalty is involved. And in this case he must exercise great care, as we shall show;
       and first we shall speak of the method of sentencing a witch to such torture.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_13a.html (2 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:05 PM]
Part III, Second Head, Question XIII

                                                            Question XIV

                                                        Main Index


                                                 Part III, Second Head, Question XIII
                                                  was transcribed by Christie Rice.

                           HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network.
                                                 All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_13a.html (3 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:05 PM]
Notes

            “Hanging.” There are recorded many instances of this. In 1597 the Scotch warlock
        Playfair, having killed Lord Lothian by witchcraft, was laid for, and "being soon
        apprehended, was made prisoner in Dalkeith steeple, and having confest that and much
        more wickedness to Mr. Archibald Simson, minister there, and that confession coming to the
        ears of Robert, Earl of Lothian, my lord’s son, he had moyen to get some persons admited to
        speak with the prisoner in the night, by which means he was found worried in the morning,
        and the point of his breeches knit about his neck, but never more inquiry was made who had
        done the deed."
            Alice Gooderidge, a Derbyshire witch, who was tried in 1597 and condemned, "should
        have bin executed, but that her spirit killed her in the prison." John Stewart, a warlock of
        Irvine, in 1618, "for his better preferring to the day of the assys, was put in one lockfast
        buith, . . . and for avoyding of putting violent handis on himself, was verie strictly gairdit
        and flitherit be the airms, as us is." He was visited by two ministers, who exhorted him to
        repentance, and seemed very contrite, confessing his witchcrafts. However, almost
        immediately after "he was fund be the burrow officers, quha went about him stranglit and
        hangit be the cruik of the dur, with ane tait of hemp (or a string maid of hemp, supposed to
        haif been his garters, or string of his bonnet) not above the length of two span long, hi
        kneyis not being from the grund half ane span, and was brocht out of the hous, his lyf not
        being so layt expellit: but notwithstanding of quhat-somever meines usit to the contrair for
        remeid of his lyf, he revievit not, but so endit his lyf miserable by the help of the devill his
        maister." In 1649 the lady of Pittahro, Mistress Henderson, "being delated by many to be a
        witch, was apprehended and carried to Edenbroughe, wher she was keiped fast; and after
        her remaining in prison for a tyme, being in health all night, upon the morne was found
        dead. It was thought, and spoken by many, that she wronged her selfe, either by strangling
        or by poyson."
            It is recorded of the Renfrewshire trials (1697) that John Reid, a notorious warlock of
        Bargarran, "after his Confession had called out of his prison Window, desiring Baily Scott
        to keep that old body Angus Forrester, who had been his fellow prisoner, close and secure;
        whereupon the company asked John when they were leaving him on Friday night the 21st of
        May, whether he desired company or would be afraid alone, he said he had no fear of
        anything: So being left till Saturday in the Forenoon, he was found in this posture, viz.
        sitting upon a stool which was on the Hearth of the Chimney, with his feet on the floor and
        his Body straight upward, his shoulders touching the lintel of the Chimney, upon which the
        Company, especially John Campbell a Chyrurgeon who was called, thought at first in
        respect of his being in an ordinary posture of sitting, and the neck-cloath not having any
        drawn knot (or "run loup") but an ordinary one which was not very strait, and the sticke not
        having the strength to bear the weight of his Body or the struggle, that he had not been quite
        dead; but finding it otherways, and that he was such a Situation that he could not have been
        the Actor thereof himself, concluded that some extraordinary Agent had done it, especially
        considering that the Door of the room was secured, and that there was a board set over the
        Window which was not there the night before when they left him."




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/notes/n3010.html [2002-01-20 12:04:05 PM]
Part III, Second Head, Question XIV


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                      PART III, SECOND HEAD, QUESTION XIV.
 Of the Method of Sentencing the Accused to be Questioned: and How she must be Questioned on the
              First Day; and Whether she may be Promised her Life. The Ninth Action

             SECONDLY, the Judge must take care to frame his sentence in the following manner.
             We, the Judge and assessors, having attended to and considered the details of the
       process enacted by us against you N. of such a place in such a Diocese, and having
       diligently examined the whole matter, find that your are equivocal in your admissions; as for
       example, when you say that you used such threats with no intention of doing an injury, but
       nevertheless there are various proofs which are sufficient warrant for exposing you to the
       question and torture. Wherefore, that the truth may be known from your own mouth, and
       that henceforth you may not offend the ears of the Judges, we declare, judge and sentence
       that on this present day at such an hour you be placed under the question and torture. This
       sentence was given, etc.
             Alternatively, as has been said, the Judge may not be willing to deliver the accused up
       to be questioned, but may punish her with imprisonment with the following object in view.
       Let him summon her friends and put it to the that she may escape the death penalty,
       although she will be punished in another way, if she confesses the truth, and urge them to try
       to persuade her to do so. For very often meditation, and the misery of imprisonment, and the
       repeated advice of honest men, dispose the accused to discover the truth.
             And we have found that witches have been so strengthened by this sort of advice that,
       as a sign of their rebellion, they have spat on the ground as if it were in the devil's face,
       saying, “Depart, cursed devil; I shall do what is just” and afterwards they have confessed
       their crimes.
             But if, after keeping the accused in a state of suspense, and continually postponing the
       day of examination, and frequently using verbal persuasions, the Judge should truly believe
       that the accused is denying the truth, let them question her lightly without shedding blood;
       knowing that such questioning is fallacious and often, as has been said, ineffective.
             And it should be begun in this way. While the officers are preparing for the
       questioning, let the accused be stripped; or if she is a woman, let her first be led to the penal
       cells and there stripped by honest women of good reputation. And the reason for this is that
       they should search for any instrument of witchcraft sewn into her clothes; for they often
       make such instruments, at the instruction of devils, out of the limbs of unbaptized children,
       the purpose being that those children should be deprived of the beatific vision. And when
       such instruments have been disposed of, the Judge shall use his own persuasions and those
       of other honest men zealous for the faith to induce her to confess the truth voluntarily; and if
       she will not, let him order the officers to bind her with cords, and apply her to some engine
       of torture; and then let them obey at once but not joyfully, rather appearing to be disturbed
       by their duty. Then let her be released again at someone's earnest request, and taken on one

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_14a.html (1 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:06 PM]
Part III, Second Head, Question XIV

       side, and let her again be persuaded; and in persuading her, let her be told that she can
       escape the death penalty.
             Here it is asked whether, in the case of a prisoner legally convicted by her general bad
       reputation, by witnesses, and by the evidence of the fact, so that the only thing lacking is a
       confession of the crime from her own mouth, the Judge can lawfully promise her her life,
       whereas if she were to confess the crime she would suffer the extreme penalty.
             We answer that different people have various opinions on this question. For some hold
       that if the accused is of a notoriously bad reputation, and gravely suspected on unequivocal
       evidence of the crime; and if she is herself a great source of danger, as being the mistress of
       other witches, then she may be promised her life on the following conditions; that she be
       sentenced to imprisonment for life on bread and water, provided that she supply evidence
       which will lead to the conviction of other witches. And she is not to be told, when she is
       promised her life, that she is to be imprisoned in this way; but should be led to suppose that
       some other penance, such as exile, will be imposed on her as punishment. And without
       doubt notorious witches, especially such as use witches' medicines and cure the bewitched
       by superstitious means, should be kept in this way, both that they may help the bewitched,
       and that they may betray other witches. But such a betrayal by them must not be considered
       of itself sufficient ground for a conviction, since the devil is a liar, unless it is also
       substantiated by the evidence of the fact, and by witnesses.
             Others think that, after she has been consigned to prison in this way, the promise to
       spare her life should be kept for a time, but that after a certain period she should be burned.
             A third opinion is that the Judge may safely promise the accused her life, but in such a
       way that he should afterwards disclaim the duty of passing sentence on her, deputing
       another Judge in his place.
             There seems to be some advantage in pursuing the first of these courses on account of
       the benefit which may accrue from it to those who are bewitched; yet it is not lawful to use
       witchcraft to cure witchcraft, although (as was shown in the First and Introductory Question
       to this Third Part) the general opinion is that it is lawful to use vain and superstitious means
       to remove a spell. But use and experience and the variety of such cases will be of more
       value to Judges than any art or text-book; therefore this is a matter which should be left to
       the Judges. But it has certainly been very often found by experience that many would
       confess the truth if they were not held back by the fear of death.
             But if neither threats nor such promises will induce her to confess the truth, then the
       officers must proceed with the sentence, and she must by examined, not in any new or
       exquisite manner, but in the usual way, lightly or heavily according as the nature of her
       crimes demands. And while she is being questioned about each several point, let her be
       often and frequently exposed to torture, beginning with the more gentle of them; for the
       Judge should not be too hasty to proceed to the graver kind. And while this is being done, let
       the Notary write all down, how she is tortured and what questions are asked and how she
       answers.
             And note that, if she confesses under torture, she should then be taken to another place
       and questioned anew, so that she does not confess only under the stress of torture.
             The next step of the Judge should be that, if after being fittingly tortured she refuses to
       confess the truth, he should have other engines of torture brought before her, and tell her
       that she will have to endure these if she does not confess. If then she is not induced by terror
       to confess, the torture must be continued on the second or third day, but not repeated at that

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_14a.html (2 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:06 PM]
Part III, Second Head, Question XIV

       present time unless there should be some fresh indication of its probable success.
             Let the sentence be pronounced in her presence in the following manner: We the
       aforesaid Judge, as above, assign to you N. such a day for the continuation of your
       questioning, that the truth may be heard from your own mouth. And the Notary shall write
       all down in the process.
             And during the interval before that assigned time the Judge himself or other honest
       men shall do all in their power to persuade her to confess the truth in the manner we have
       said, giving her, if it seems expedient to them, a promise that her life will be spared.
             The Judge should also take care that during that interval there should always be guards
       with her, so that she is never left alone, for fear lest the devil will cause her to kill herself.
       But the devil himself knows better than anyone can set down in writing whether he will
       desert her of his own will, or be compelled to do so by God.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                             Question XV

                                                        Main Index


                                               Part III, Second Head, Question XIV
                                               was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_14a.html (3 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:06 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XV


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                       PART III, SECOND HEAD, QUESTION IV.
  Of the Continuing of the Torture, and of the Devices and Signs by which the Judge can Recognize a
 Witch; and how he ought to Protect himself from their Spells. Also how they are to be Shaved in Parts
where they use to Conceal the Devil's Masks and Tokens; together with the due Setting Forth of Various
  Means of Overcoming the Obstinacy in Keeping Silence and Refusal to Confess. And it is the Tenth
                                                Action.

             THE Judge should act as follows in the continuation of the torture. First he should bear
       in mind that, just as the same medicine is not applicable to all the members, but there are
       various and distinct salves for each several member, so not all heretics or those accused of
       heresy are to be subjected to the same method of questioning, examination and torture as to
       the charges laid against them; but various and different means are to be employed according
       to their various natures and persons. Now a surgeon cuts off rotten limbs; and mangy sheep
       are isolated from the healthy; but a prudent Judge will not consider it safe to bind himself
       down to one invariable rule in his method of dealing with a prisoner who is endowed with a
       witch's power of taciturnity, and whose silence he is unable to overcome. For if the sons of
       darkness were to become accustomed to one general rule they would provide means of
       evading it as a well-known snare set for their destruction.
             Therefore a prudent and zealous Judge should seize his opportunity and choose his
       method of conducting his examination according to the answers or depositions of the
       witnesses, or as his own previous experience or native wit indicates to him, using the
       following precautions.
             If he wishes to find out whether she is endowed with a witch's power of preserving
       silence, let him take note whether she is able to shed tears when standing in his presence, or
       when being tortured. For we are taught both by the words of worthy men of old and by our
       own experience that this is a most certain sign, and it has been found that even if she be
       urged and exhorted by solemn conjurations to shed tears, if she be a witch she will not be
       able to weep: although she will assume a tearful aspect and smear her cheeks and eyes with
       spittle to make it appear that she is weeping; wherefore she must be closely watched by the
       attendants.
             In passing sentence the Judge or priest may use some such method as the following in
       conjuring her to true tears if she be innocent, or in restraining false tears. Let him place his
       hand on the head of the accused and say: I conjure you by the bitter tears shed on the Cross
       by our Saviour the Lord JESUS Christ for the salvation of the world, and by the burning
       tears poured in the evening hour over His wounds by the most glorious Virgin MARY, His
       Mother, and by all the tears which have been shed here in this world by the Saints and Elect
       of God, from whose eyes He has now wiped away all tears, that if you be innocent you do
       now shed tears, but if you be guilty that you shall by no means do so. In the name of the
       Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen.

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_15a.html (1 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:07 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XV

             And it is found by experience that the more they are conjured the less are they able to
       weep, however hard they may try to do so, or smear their cheeks with spittle. Nevertheless it
       is possible that afterwards, in the absence of the Judge and not at the time or in the place of
       torture, they may be able to weep in the presence of their gaolers.
             And as for the reason for a witch's inability to weep, it can be said that the grace of
       tears is one of the chief gifts allowed to the penitent; for S. Bernard tells us that the tears of
       the humble can penetrate to heaven and conquer the unconquerable. Therefore there can be
       no doubt that they are displeasing to the devil, and that he uses all his endeavour to restrain
       them, to prevent a witch from finally attaining to penitence.
             But it may be objected that it might suit with the devil's cunning, with God's
       permission, to allow even a witch to weep; since tearful grieving, weaving and deceiving are
       said to be proper to women. We may answer that in this case, since the judgements of God
       are a mystery, if there is no other way of convicting the accused, by legitimate witnesses or
       the evidence of the fact, and if she is not under a strong or grave suspicion, she is to be
       discharged; but because she rests under a slight suspicion by reason of her reputation to
       which the witnesses have testified, she must be required to abjure the heresy of witchcraft,
       as we shall show when we deal with the second method of pronouncing sentence.
             A second precaution is to be observed, not only at this point but during the whole
       process, by the Judge and all his assessors; namely, that they must not allow themselves to
       be touched physically by the witch, especially in any contract of their bare arms or hands;
       but they must always carry about them some salt consecrated on Palm Sunday and some
       Blessed Herbs. For these can be enclosed together in Blessed Wax and worn round the neck,
       as we showed in the Second Part when we discussed the remedies against illnesses and
       diseases caused by witchcraft; and that these have a wonderful protective virtue is known
       not only from the testimony of witches, but from the use and practice of the Church, which
       exorcizes and blesses such objects for this very purpose, as is shown in the ceremony of
       exorcism when it is said, For the banishing of all the power of the devil, etc.
             But let it not be thought that physical contact of the joints or limbs is the only thing to
       be guarded against; for sometimes, with God's permission, they are able with the help of the
       devil to bewitch the Judge by the mere sound of the words which they utter, especially at the
       time when they are exposed to torture.
             And we know from experience that some witches, when detained in prison, have
       importunately begged their gaolers to grant them this one thing, that they should be allowed
       to look at the Judge before he looks at them; and by so getting the first sight of the Judge
       they have been able so to alter the minds of the Judge or his assessors that they have lost all
       their anger against them and have not presumed to molest them in any way, but have
       allowed them to go free. He who knows and has experienced it gives this true testimony;
       and would that they were not able to effect such things!
             Let judges not despise such precautions and protections, for by holding them in little
       account after such warning they run the risk of eternal damnation. For our Saviour said: If I
       had not come, and spoken to them, they would not have sin; but now they have no excuse
       for their sin. Therefore let the judges protect themselves in the above manner, according to
       the provisions of the Church.
             And if it can conveniently be done, the witch should be led backward into the presence
       of the Judge and his assessors. And not only at the present point, but in all that has preceded


file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_15a.html (2 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:07 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XV

       or shall follow it, let him cross himself and approach her manfully, and with God's help the
       power of that old Serpent will be broken. And no one need think that it is superstitious to
       lead her in backwards; for, as we have often said, the Canonists allow even more than this to
       be done for the protections against witchcraft, and always say that it is lawful to oppose
       vanity with vanity.
             The third precaution to be observed in this tenth action is that the hair should be shaved
       from every part of her body. The reason for this is the same as that for stripping her of her
       clothes, which we have already mentioned; for in order to preserve their power of silence
       they are in the habit of hiding some superstitious object in their clothes or in their hair, or
       even in the most secret parts of the their bodies which must not be named.
             But it may be objected that the devil might, without the use of such charms, so harden
       the heart of a witch that she is unable to confess her crimes; just as it is often found in the
       case of other criminals, no matter how great the tortures to which they are exposed, or how
       much they are convicted by the evidence of the facts and of witnesses. We answer that it is
       true that the devil can affect such taciturnity without the use of such charms; but he prefers
       to use them for the perdition of souls and the greater offence to the Divine Majesty of God.
             This can be made clear from the example of a certain witch in the town of Hagenau,
       whom we have mentioned in the Second Part of this work. She used to obtain this gift of
       silence in the following manner: she killed a newly-born first-born male child who had not
       been baptized, and having roasted it in an oven together with other matters which it is not
       expedient to mention, ground it to powder and ashes; and if any witch or criminal carried
       about him some of this substance he would in no way be able to confess his crimes.
             Here it is clear that a hundred thousand children so employed could not of their own
       virtue endow a person with such a power of keeping silence; but any intelligent person can
       understand that such means are used by the devil for the perdition of souls and to offend the
       Divine Majesty.
             Again, it may be objected that very often criminals who are not witches exhibit the
       same power of keeping silence. In answer to this it must be said tat this power of taciturnity
       can proceed from three causes. First, from a natural hardness of heart; for some are
       soft-hearted, or even feeble-minded, so that at the slightest torture they admit everything,
       even some things which are not true; whereas others are so hard that however much they are
       tortured the truth is not to be had from them; and this is especially the case with those who
       have been tortured before, even if their arms are suddenly stretched or twisted.
             Secondly, it may proceed from some instrument of witchcraft carried about the person,
       as has been said, either in the clothes or in the hairs of the body. And thirdly, even if the
       prisoner has no such object secreted about her person, they are sometimes endowed with this
       power by other witches, however far they may be removed from them. For a certain witch at
       Issbrug used to boast that, if she had no more than a thread from the garments of any
       prisoner, she could so work that however much that prisoner were tortured, even to death,
       she would be unable to confess anything. So the answer to this objection is clear.
             But what is to be said of a case that happened in the Diocese of Ratisbon? Certain
       heretics were convicted by their own confession not only as impenitent but as open
       advocates of that perfidy; and when they were condemned to death it happened that they
       remained unharmed in the fire. At length their sentence was altered to death by drowning,
       but this was no more effective. All were astonished, and some even began to say that their


file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_15a.html (3 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:07 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XV

       heresy must be true; and the Bishop, in great anxiety for his flock, ordered a three days' fast.
       When this had been devoutly fulfilled, it came to the knowledge of someone that those
       heretics had a magic charm sewed between the skin and the flesh under one arm; and when
       this was found and removed, they were delivered to the flames and immediately burned.
       Some say that a certain necromancer learned this secret during a consultation with the devil,
       and betrayed it; but however it became known, it is probably that the devil, who is always
       scheming for the subversion of faith, was in some way compelled by Divine power to reveal
       the matter.
             From this it may be seen what a Judge ought to do when such a case happens to him:
       namely, that he should rely upon the protection of God, and by the prayers and fasting of
       devout persons drive away this sort of devil's work from witches, in those cases where they
       cannot be made to confess under torture even after their clothes have been changed and all
       their hair has been shaved off and abraded.
             Now in the parts of Germany such shaving, especially of the secret parts, is not
       generally considered delicate, and therefore we Inquisitors do not use it; but we cause the
       hair of their head to be cut off, and placing a morsel of Blessed Wax in a cup of Holy Water
       and invoking the most Holy Trinity, we give it them to drink three times on a fasting
       stomach, and by the grace of God we have by this means caused many to break their silence.
       But in other countries the Inquisitors order the witch to be shaved all over her body. And the
       Inquisitor of Como has informed us that last year, that is, in 1485, he ordered forty-one
       witches to be burned, after they had been shaved all over. And this was in the district and
       county of Burbia, commonly called Wormserbad, in the territory of the Archduke of
       Austria, towards Milan.
             But it may be asked whether, in a time of need, when all other means of breaking a
       witch's silence have failed, it would be lawful to ask the advice in this matter of sorceresses
       who are able to cure those who are bewitched. We answer that, whatever may have been doe
       in that matter at Ratisbon, it is our earnest admonition in the Lord that no one, no matter
       how great may be the need, should consult with sorceresses on behalf of the State; and this
       because of the great offence which is thereby caused to the Divine Majesty, when there are
       so many other means open to us which we may use either in their own proper form or in
       some equivalent form, so that the truth will be had from their own mouths and they can be
       consigned to the flames; or failing this, God will in the meantime provide some other death
       for the witch.
             For there remain to us the following remedies against this power of silence. First, let a
       man do all that lies in his own power by the exercise of his qualities, persisting often with
       the methods we have already mentioned, and especially on certain days, as will be shown in
       the following Question. See II. Corinthians ix: That ye may abound in all good works.
             Secondly, if this should fail, let him consult with other persons; for perhaps they may
       think of some means which has not occurred to him, since there are various methods of
       counteracting witchcraft.
             Thirdly, if these two fail, let him have recourse to devout persons, as it is said in
       Ecclesiasticus xxxvii: Be continually with a godly man, whom thou knowest to keep the
       commandments of the Lord. Also let him invoke the Patron Saints of the country. But if all
       these fail, let the Judge and all the people at once put their trust in God with prayers and
       fasting, that the witchcraft may be removed by reason of their piety. For so Josaphat prayed
       in II. Paralipomenon xx: When we know no what we should do, we have this one refuge,

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_15a.html (4 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:07 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XV

       that we should turn our eyes to Thee. And without doubt God will not fail us in our need.
             To this effect also S. Augustine speaks (26, q. 7, non obseruabitis): Whosoever
       observes any divinations or auguries, or attends to or consents to such as observe them, or
       gives credit to such by following after their works, or goes into their houses, or introduces
       them into his own house, or asks questions of them, let him know that he has perverted the
       Christian faith and his baptism and is a pagan and apostate and enemy of God, unless he is
       corrected by ecclesiastical penances and is reconciled with God. Therefore let the Judge not
       fail always to use the lawful remedies, as we have said, together with these following final
       precautions.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                            Question XVI

                                                        Main Index


                                                   Part III, First Head, Question XV
                                                   was transcribed by Christie Rice.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_15a.html (5 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:07 PM]
Notes

           “Tears.” The beautiful devotion to the Sacred Tears of Our Lord is well known. The
        Premonstratensians have a Mass, “De Lacryma Christi,” proper to the Order.
           Our Lady of Tears, Santa Maria delle Lagrime, is the Patroness of Spoleto. A picture of
        Our Lady, painted upon the wall of the house belonging to Diotallevio d’Antonio, which
        stood on the road from Spoleto to Trevi, was seen to shed tears in great abundance. Many
        graces and favours were obtained before the miraculous picture. A small chapel was
        erected on the spot in August 1485, and Mass was daily offered therein. On 27 March 1487,
        the large basilica was begun, which on its completion, 8 March 1489, was entrusted to the
        Olivetans.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/notes/n3011.html [2002-01-20 12:04:07 PM]
Notes

           “Blessed Wax.” The “Agnus Dei,” which is a disc of wax, stamped with the figure of a
        Lamb, and on certain stated days blessed by the Holy Father. These Agnus Deis may either
        be worn suspended round the neck, or preserved as objects of devotion. They are to be
        regarded as Sacramentals.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/notes/n3012.html [2002-01-20 12:04:07 PM]
Notes

           “Sin.” S. John" xv, 22.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/notes/n3013.html [2002-01-20 12:04:07 PM]
Notes

            “Gift of Silence.” De Lancre, “Tableau de l’inconstance des mauvais agnes et demons,”
        Paris, 1912, has: “pour ne confessor iamais le secret de l’escole, on faict au sabbat une
        paste de millet noir, auec de la poudre du foyer de quelque enfant non baptise qu’on faict
        secher, puis meslant cette poudre avec ladicte paste, elle a cette vertu de tacitrunite; si bien
        que qui en mange ne confesse iamais.” Five Forfar witches, of which one was Helen
        Guthrie, in 1661 dug up the body of an unbaptized infant, which was buried in the
        churchyard near the south-east door of the church “and took severall peices thereof, as the
        feet, hands, pairt of the head, and a pairt of the buttocks, and they made a py thereof, that
        they might eat of it, that by this means they might never make a confession (as they thought)
        of their witchcraft.”




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/notes/n3014.html [2002-01-20 12:04:08 PM]
Part III, Second Head, Question XVI


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                      PART III, SECOND HEAD, QUESTION XVI.
Of the fit Time and of the Method of the Second Examination. And it is the Eleventh Action, concerning
                           the Final Precautions to be Observed by the Judge

             THERE are one or two points to be noted with regard to what we have just written.
       First, that witches should be questioned on the more Holy Days and during the
       solemnization of the Mass, and that the people should be exhorted to pray for Divine help,
       not in any specific manner, but that they should invoke the prayers of the Saints against all
       the plagues of the devil.
             Secondly, as we have said before, the Judge should wear round his neck Consecrated
       Salt and other matters, with the Seven Words which Christ uttered on the Cross written in a
       schedule, and all bound together. And he should, if he conveniently can, wear these made
       into the length of Christ's stature against his naked body, and bind other Holy things about
       him. For it is shown by experience that witches are greatly troubled by these things, and can
       hardly refrain from confessing the truth. The Relics of the Saints, too, are of especial virtue.
             Having taken these precautions, and after giving her Holy Water to drink, let him again
       begin to question her, all the time exhorting her as before. And while she is raised from the
       ground, if she is being tortured in this way, let the Judge read or cause to be read to her the
       depositions of the witnesses with their names, saying: “See! You are convicted by the
       witnesses.” Also, if the witnesses are willing to confront her face to face, the Judge shall ask
       her if she will confess if the witnesses are brought before her. And if she consents, let the
       witnesses be brought in and stand before her, so that she may be contrained or shamed into
       confessing some of her crimes.
             Finally, if he sees that she will not admit her crimes, he shall ask her whether, to prove
       her innocence, she is ready to undergo the ordeal by red-hot iron. And they all desire this,
       knowing that the devil will prevent them from being hurt; therefore a true witch is exposed
       in this manner. The Judge shall ask her how she can be so rash as to run so great a risk, and
       all shall be written down; but it will be shown later that they are never to be allowed to
       undergo this ordeal by red-hot iron.
             Let the Judge also not that when witches are questioned on a Friday, while the people
       are gathered together at Holy Mass to await our Saviour, they very often confess.
             But we must proceed to the extreme case, when after every expedient has been tried the
       witch still maintains silence. The Judge shall then loose her and, using the precautions
       which follow, shall take her from the place of punishment to another place under a strong
       guard; but let him take particular care not to release her on any sort of security; for when
       that is done, they never confess the truth, but always become worse.
             But in the first place let him cause her to be well treated in the manner of food and
       drink, and meanwhile let honest persons who are under no suspicion enter to her and talk
       often with her on indifferent subjects, and finally advise her in confidence to confess the

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_16a.html (1 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:08 PM]
Part III, Second Head, Question XVI

       truth, promising that the Judge will be merciful to her and that they will intercede for her.
       And finally let the Judge come in and promise that he will be merciful with the mental
       reservation that he means he will be merciful to himself or the State; for whatever is done
       for the safety of the State is merciful.
             But if he promises her her life, as we showed in Question XIV that he can do in three
       ways, let it all be written down by the Notary in what words and with what intention mercy
       was promised. And if the accused begs for mercy in this way, and discovers her crime, let
       her be promised in a vague and general way that she will receive even more than she has
       petitioned for, so that she may speak with the greater confidence.
             As a second precaution in this case, when she refuses altogether to reveal the truth, the
       Judge should, as we have said before, examine her friends and associates without her
       knowledge; and if these have deposed anything which might lead to her conviction, this
       must be diligently investigated. Also, if any instruments or unguents or boxes have been
       found in her house, they should be shown to her, and she should be asked for what purposes
       they have been used.
             A third precaution can be taken when she still persists in her obstinancy after her
       associates have been examined and borne witness against her, and not for her. If she has no
       friends, let some other trustworthy man who is known to be congenial to the accused and to
       some extent a patron of hers, enter to the witch one evening and engage her in a protracted
       conversation. And then, if he is not an accomplice, let him pretend that it is too late for him
       to return, and stay in the prison with her, and continue talking during the night. And if he is
       an accomplice, let them eat and drink together, and talk to each other about the things they
       have done. And then let it be arranged that spies should stand outside in a convenient place,
       and listen to them and take note of their words, and if necessary let the have a scribe with
       them.
             As a fourth precaution, if she then begins to tell the truth, let the Judge on no account
       postpone hearing her confession, even in the middle of the night, buy proceed with it to the
       best of his ability. And if it is in the day-time, let him not care if he delays his luncheon or
       dinner, but persist until she has told the truth, at least in the main. For it is generally found
       that, after postponements and interruptions, they return to their vomit and will not reveal the
       truth which they began to confess, having thought worse of it.
             And let the Judge take note that, after she has confessed the injuries done to men and
       animals, he shall ask her for how many years she has had an Incubus devil, and how long it
       is since she abjured the faith. For they never confess to these matters unless they have first
       confessed to these matters unless they have first confessed their other deeds; therefore they
       must be asked concerning these last of all.
             As a fifth precaution, when all the above have failed, let her, if possible, be led to some
       castle; and after she has been kept there under custody for some days, let the castellan
       pretend that he is going on a long journey. And then let some of his household, or even
       some honest women, visit her and promise that they will set her entirely at liberty if she will
       teach them how to conduct certain practices. And let the Judge take note that by this means
       they have very often confessed and been convicted.
             Quite lately a witch was detained in the Castle of Königsheim near the town of
       Schlettstadt in the Diocese of Strasburg, and could not be induced by any tortures or
       questions to confess her crimes. But at last the castellan used the method we have just


file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_16a.html (2 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:08 PM]
Part III, Second Head, Question XVI

       described. Although he was himself present in the castle, the witch thought he was away,
       and three of his household came in to her and promised they would set her free if she would
       teach them how to do certain things. At first she refused, saying that they were trying to
       entrap her; but at last she asked what it was that they wanted to know. And one asked how
       to raise a hailstorm, and another asked about carnal matters. When at length she agreed to
       show him how to raise a hailstorm, and a bowl of water had been brought in, the witch told
       him to stir the water with his finger, and herself uttered certain words, and suddenly the
       place which he had named, a wood near the castle, was visited by such a tempest and storm
       of hail as had not been seen for many years.
             It yet remains to show how the Judge is to proceed in pronouncing sentence in a case
       where all these means have failed, or what is further to be done even when she has
       confessed her crimes, that the whole process may be brought to an end; and we shall
       complete this Last Part of this work with a consideration of these matters.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                   Part III, The Third Head

                                                        Main Index


                                               Part III, Second Head, Question XVI
                                               was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_16a.html (3 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:08 PM]
Notes

           “They Return.” “Proverbs” xxvi, II: “As a dog that returneth to his vomit, so is the fool
        that repeateth his folly.” II. S. Peter, ii, 22: “For, that of the true proverb has happened to
        them: the dog is returned to his vomit: and, The sow that was washed, to her wallowing in
        the mire.”




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/notes/n3015.html [2002-01-20 12:04:08 PM]
Part III, The Third Head


                                   THE
                           MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                 PART III, THE THIRD HEAD
                 Which is the Last Part of the Work: How the Process is to be Concluded by the
                                Pronouncement of a Definite and Just Sentence.

             HAVING by the grace of God examined the proper means of arriving at a knowledge
       of the heresy of witchcraft, and having shown how the process on behalf of the faith should
       be initiated and proceeded with, it remains to discuss how that process is to be brought to a
       fitting termination with an appropriate sentence.
             Here it is to be noted that this heresy, as was shown in the beginning of this Last Part,
       is not to be confused with other simple heresies, since it is obvious that it is not a pure and
       single crime, but partly ecclesiastical and partly civil. Therefore in dealing with the methods
       of passing sentence, we must first consider a certain kind of sentence to which witches are in
       the habit of appealing, in which the secular judge can act on his own account independently
       of the Ordinary. Secondly, we shall consider those in which he cannot act without the
       Ordinary. And so thirdly it will be shown how the Ordinaries can discharge themselves of
       their duties.
                                                                Page 1 of 1


                                                          Question XVII

                                                       Main Index


                                                  Part III, Third Head introduction
                                                  was transcribed by Christie Rice.

                           HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                   All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03c00a.html [2002-01-20 12:04:09 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XVII


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                       PART III, THIRD HEAD, QUESTION XVII.
       Of Common Purgation, and especially of the Trial of Red-hot Iron, to which Witches Appeal

             THE question is now asked whether the secular judge may allow a witch to be
       submitted to a common purgation (concerning which see the Canon 2, q. 4, consuluisti, and
       cap. monomachiam), in the manner in which a civil defendant is allowed the trial by ordeal,
       as, for example, that by red-hot iron. And it may seem that he may do so.
             For trial by combat is allowable in a criminal case for the protection of life, and in a
       civil case for the protection of property; then wherefore not the trial by red-hot iron or
       boiling water? S. Thomas allows that the former is permissible in some cases, when he says
       in the last article of the Second of the Second, q. 95, that a duel is lawful when it appears to
       be consonant with commonsense. Therefore the trial by red-hot iron should also be lawful in
       some cases.
             Also it has been used by many Princes of saintly life who have availed themselves of
       the advice and counsel of good men; as, for example, the Sainted Emperor Henry in the case
       of the virgin Cunegond whom he had married, who was suspected of adultery.
             Again, a judge, who is responsible for the safety of the community, may lawfully allow
       a smaller evil that a greater may be avoided; as he allows the existence of harlots in towns in
       order to avoid a general confusion of lust. For S. Augustine On Free Will says: Take away
       the harlots, and you will create a general chaos and confusion of lust. So, when a person has
       been loaded with insults and injuries by any community, he can clear himself of any
       criminal or civil charge by means of a trial by ordeal.
             Also, since less hurt is caused to the hands by the red-hot iron than is the loss of life in
       a duel, if a duel is permitted where such things are customary, much more should the trial by
       red-hot iron be allowed.
             But the contrary view is argued where it says (2, q. 5, monomachiam) that they who
       practice such and similar things appear to be tempting God. And here the Doctors affirm it
       must be noted that, according to S. Paul (I. Thessalonians v), we must abstain, not only from
       evil, but from all appearance of evil. Therefore the Canon says in that chapter, not that they
       who use such practices tempt God, but that they appear to tempt Him, so that it may be
       understood that, even if a man engage in such a trial with none but good intentions, yet since
       it has the appearance of evil, it is to be avoided.
             I answer that such tests or trials are unlawful for two reasons. First, because their
       purpose is to judge of hidden matters of which it belongs only to God to judge. Secondly,
       because there is no Divine authority for such trials, nor are they anywhere sanctioned in the
       writings of the Holy Fathers. And it says in the chapter consuluisti, 2, q. 5: That which is not
       sanctioned in the writings of the Sainted Fathers is to be presumed superstitious. And Pope
       Stephen in the same chapter says: It is left to your judgement to try prisoners who are


file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_17a.html (1 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:09 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XVII

       convicted by their own confession or the proofs of the evidence; but leave that which is
       hidden and unknown to Him Who alone knows the hearts of men.
             There is, nevertheless, a difference between a duel and the trial by red-hot iron or
       boiling water. For a duel appears to be more humanly reasonable, the combatants being of
       similar strength and skill, than a trial by red-hot iron. For although the purpose of both is to
       search out something hidden by means of a human act; yet in the case of trial by red-hot iron
       a miraculous effect is looked for, whereas this is not so in the case of a duel, in which all
       that can happen is the death of either, or both, of the combatants. Therefore the trial by
       red-hot iron is altogether unlawful; though a duel is not illegal to the same extent. So much
       has been incidentally admitted in respect of duels, on account of Princes and secular Judges.
             It is to be noted that, because of those words of S. Thomas which make the above
       distinction, Nicolas of Lyra, in his Commentary on the duel or combat between David and
       Goliath, I. Regum xvii, tried to prove that in some cases a duel is lawful. But Paul of Burgos
       proves that not this, but rather the opposite was the meaning of S. Thomas; and all Princes
       and secular Judges ought to pay particular attention to his proof.
             His first point is that a duel, like the other trial by ordeal, has as its purpose the
       judgement of something hidden, which ought to be left to the judgement of God, as we have
       said. And it cannot be said that this combat of David is an authority for duelling; for it was
       revealed to him by the Lord through some inner instinct that he must engage in that combat
       and avenge upon the Philistine the injuries done against God, as is proved by David's words:
       I come against thee in the name of the living God. So he was not properly speaking a
       duellist, but he was an executor of Divine justice.
             His second point is that Judges must especially note that in a duel power, or at least
       licence, is given to each of the parties to kill the other. But since one of them is innocent,
       that power of licence is given for the killing of an innocent man; and this is unlawful, as
       being contrary to the dictates of natural law and to the teaching of God. Therefore, a duel is
       altogether unlawful, not only on the part of the appellant and the respondent, but also on the
       part of the Judge and his advisers, who are all equally to be considered homicides or parties
       to manslaughter.
             Thirdly, he points out that a duel is a single combat between two men, the purpose of
       which is that the justice of the case should be made clear by the victory of one party, as if by
       Divine judgement, notwithstanding the fact that one of the parties is fighting in an unjust
       cause; and in this way God is tempted. Therefore it is unlawful on the part both of the
       appellant and the respondent. But considering the fact that the judges have other means of
       arriving at an equitable and just termination of the dispute, when they do not use such
       means, but advise or even permit a duel when they could forbid it, they are consenting to the
       death of an innocent person.
             But since it is unlikely that Nicolas the Commentator was unaware or ignorant of the
       above reasoning, it is concluded that, when he says that in some cases a duel can be fought
       without mortal sin, he is speaking on the part of the Judges or advisers, namely, in a case
       when such a trial is undertaken, not on their responsibility or advice, but purely on that of
       the appellant and respondent themselves.
             But since it is not our purpose to linger over and debate such considerations, but to
       return to the question of witches, it is clear that, if this sort of trial is forbidden in the case of
       other criminal causes, such as theft or robbery, still more must it be forbidden in the case of
       witches who, it is agreed, obtain all their power from the devil, whether it be for causing or

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_17a.html (2 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:09 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XVII

       curing an injury, for removing or for preventing an effect of witchcraft.
             And it is not wonderful witches are able to undergo this trial by ordeal unscathed with
       the help of devils; for we learn from naturalists that if the hands be anointed with the juice
       of a certain herb they are protected from burning. Now the devil has an exact knowledge of
       the virtues of such herbs: therefore, although he can cause the hand of the accused to be
       protected from the red-hot iron by invisibly interposing some other substance, yet he can
       procure the same effect by the use of natural objects. Hence even less that other criminals
       ought witches to be allowed this trial by ordeal, because their intimate familiarity with the
       devil; and from the very fact of their appealing to this trial they are to be held as suspected
       witches.
             An incident illustrative of our argument occurred hardly three years ago in the Diocese
       of Constance. For in the territory of the Counts of Fuerstenberg and the Black Forest there
       was a notorious witch who had been the subject of much public complaint. At last, as the
       result of a general demand, she was seized by the Count and accused of various evil works
       of witchcraft. When she was being tortured and questioned, wishing to escape from their
       hands, she appealed to the trial by red-hot iron; and the Count, being you and inexperienced,
       allowed it. And she then carried the red-hot iron not only for the stipulated three paces, but
       for six, and offered to carry it even farther. Then, although they ought to have taken this as
       manifest proof that she was a witch (since one of the Saints dared to tempt the help of God
       in this manner), she was released from her chains and lives to the present time, not without
       grave scandal to the Faith in those parts.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                           Question XVIII

                                                        Main Index


                                                  Part III, Third Head, Question XVII
                                                  was transcribed by Christie Rice.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_17a.html (3 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:09 PM]
Notes

           “Henry.” S. Henry II, German Kind and Roman Emperor, was born 972, and died in his
        palace of Grona, at Goettingen, 13 July, 1024. He was canonized in 1146 by Eugenius III;
        and his wife Cunegond on 3 March 1200, by Innocent III. Later writers are inclined to
        believe that the ascetic theme of his maiden marriage has no foundation in fact. Saint Henry
        on assuming the Imperial dignity took to wife Cunegond, daughter of Siegfried, Count of
        Luxemburg. It has been beautifully said that she shares her husband’s celestial, as she
        shared his earthly crown. When scandalous reports were circulated concerning her honour,
        although her husband could not for a moment suspect her purity, she insisted upon an
        appeal to the trial by ordeal, and having walked unhurt over the red-hot plough-shares,
        publicly testified her innocence. The story is immensely popular in German poetry and
        German art. A print by Hans Burgkmair shows her stepping over the shares, one of which
        she holds in her hand. Upon her shrine in the Cathedral at Bamburg a bas-relief by Hans
        Thielmann of Warzburg depicts the same incident. Having already retired to a Benedictine
        cloister, upon the death of her husband S. Cunegond took the veil.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/notes/n3016.html [2002-01-20 12:04:09 PM]
Notes

           “On Free Will.” S. Augustine’s “De Gratia et libero Arbitrio” was written 426—27. It
        will be found in Migne, "Patres Latini," xliv. pp. 881—912.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/notes/n3017.html [2002-01-20 12:04:10 PM]
Notes

           “Pope Stephen.” Stephen (IX) X, elected 3 August, 1057; died at Florence 29 March
        1058. He was buried in the church of S. Reparata. He was distinguished for his learning and
        even during the few short months of his Pontificate he showed himself a zealous reformer.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/notes/n3018.html [2002-01-20 12:04:10 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XVIII


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                       PART III, THIRD HEAD, QUESTION XIII.
                      Of the Manner of Pronouncing a Sentence which is Final and Definitive

             IN proceeding to treat of those cases in which the secular Judge by himself can arrive
       at a judgement and pronounce a sentence without the co-operation of the Diocesan and
       Ordinaries, we necessarily presuppose that not only is it consistent with the protection of the
       faith and of justice that we Inquisitors should be relieved of the duty of passing sentence in
       these cases, but in the same sincerity of spirit we endeavour to relieve the Diocesans also
       from that duty; not in any desire to detract from their authority and jurisdiction, for if they
       should elect to exercise their authority in such matters, it would follow that we Inquisitors
       must also concur in it.
             It must be remembered, also, that this crime of witches is not purely ecclesiastic;
       therefore the temporal potentates and Lords are not debarred from trying and judging it. At
       the same time was shall show that in some cases they must not arrive at a definitive
       judgement without the authorisation of the Diocesans.
             But first we must consider the sentence itself: secondly, the nature of its
       pronouncement; and thirdly, in how many ways it is to be pronounced.
             With regard to the first of these questions, S. Augustine says that we must not
       pronounce sentence against any person unless he has been proved guilty, or has confessed.
       Now there are three kinds of sentence - interlocutory, definitive, and preceptive. These are
       explained as follows by S. Raymond. An interlocutory sentence is one which is given not on
       the main issue of the case, but on some other side issues which emerge during the hearing of
       a case; such as a decision whether or not a witness is to be disallowed, or whether some
       digression is to be admitted, and such matters as that. Or it may perhaps be called
       interlocutory because it is delivered simply by word of mouth without the formality of
       putting it into writing.
             A definitive sentence is one which pronounces a final decision as to the main issue of
       the case.
             A preceptive sentence is one which is pronounced by a lower authority on the
       instruction of a higher. But we shall be concerned with the first two of these, and especially
       with the definitive sentence.
             Now it is laid down by law that a definitive sentence which has been arrived at without
       a due observance of the proper legal procedure in trying a case is null and void in law; and
       the legal conduct of a case consists in two things. One concerns the basis of the judgement;
       for there must be a due provision for the hearing of arguments both for the prosecution and
       the defence, and a sentence arrived at without such a hearing cannot stand. The other is not
       concerned with the basis of the judgement, but provides that the sentence must not be
       conditional; for example, a claim for possession should not be decided conditionally upon
       some subsequent claim of property; but where there is no question of such an objection the

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_18a.html (1 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:04:10 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XVIII

       sentence shall stand.
            But in the case we are considering, which is a process on behalf of the faith against a
       charge of heresy (though the charge is a mixed one), the procedure is straighforward and
       summary. That is to say, the Judge need not require a writ, or demand that the case should
       be contested. But he must allow opportunity for the necessary proofs, and issue his citation,
       and exact the protestation of the oath concerning calumny, etc. Therefore there has lately
       been a new law made as to the method of procedure in such cases.
            To proceed to our second consideration, namely, of the nature of the pronouncement of
       the sentence, it must be noted that it should be pronounced by the Judge and no one else,
       otherwise it is not valid. Also the Judge must be sitting in a public and honourable place;
       and he must pronounce it in the day-time and not in the darkness; and there are other
       conditions to be observed; for example, the sentence must not be promulgated upon a Holy
       Day, nor yet merely delivered in writing.
            Yet it is to be noted that since, as we have said, this case is conducted in a simple and
       summary manner, it may lawfully be conducted on Holy Days for the sake of the
       convenience of the public, and the Judge may cut short any digressions. Therefore the Judge
       may, if he pleases, act in such a manner, and even pass sentence without putting it in
       writing. For we are authoritatively informed that there are cases in which a sentence is valid
       without its being put into writing, as, for example, when such is the custom of any particular
       locality or Court. Also there is excellent precedent for a Bishop, when he is the Judge,
       allowing the sentence to be pronounced by some other person.
            Note again that, although in criminal actions the execution of the sentence is not to be
       delayed, this rule does not hold good in four cases, with two of which we are here
       concerned. First, when the prisoner is a pregnant woman; and then the sentence shall be
       delayed until she has given birth. Secondly, when the prisoner has confessed her crime, but
       has afterwards denied it again: that is to say, when the way which we explained in the
       Fourteenth Question.
            Now before we proceed to our third consideration, namely, the different methods of
       passing sentence which we shall proceed to treat of up to the end of this work, we must first
       make some remarks about the various ways in which a prisoner is rendered suspect, from
       which the various methods of passing sentence follow as a consequence.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                            Question XIX

                                                        Main Index


                                                Part III, Third Head, Question XVIII
                                               was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.



file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_18a.html (2 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:04:10 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XIX


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                       PART III, THIRD HEAD, QUESTION XIX.
       Of the Various Degrees of Overt Suspicion which render the Accused liable to be Sentenced

             BOTH the old and the new legislature provide an answer to the question as to in how
       many and what ways a person can be held suspect of heresy or any other crime, and whether
       they can be judged and sentenced by reason of such suspicions. For the gloss on the chapter
       nos in quemquam, which we quoted in the last Question, says that there are four means of
       convicting a prisoner: either by the depositions of witnesses in Court, or by the evidence of
       the facts, or by reason of previous convictions against the prisoner, or because of a grave
       suspicion.
             And the Canonists note that suspicion is of three kinds. The first of which the Canon
       says, “You shall not judge anyone because he is suspect in your own opinion.” The second
       is Probably; and this, but not the first, leads to a purgation. The third is Grave, and leads to a
       conviction; and S. Jerome understands this kind of suspicion when he says that a wife may
       be divorced either for fornication or for a reasonably suspected fornication.
             It must further be noted that the second, or highly probable and circumstantial,
       suspicion is admitted as a kind of half-proof; that is to say, it helps to substantiate other
       proofs. Therefore it can also lead to a judgement, and not only to a purgation. And as for the
       grave suspicion, which suffices for a conviction, note that it is of two kinds. One is of the
       law and by the law, as when the law fixes and determines some point against which no proof
       can be admitted. For example, if a man has given a woman a promise of matrimony, and
       copulation has ensued, then matrimony is presumed, and no proof to the contrary is
       admitted. The second is of the law but not by the law, as where the law presumes but does
       not determine a fact. For example, if a man has lived for a long time with a woman, she is
       presumed to have had connexion with him; but against this proofs are admitted.
             Applying this to our discussion of the heresy of witches and to the modern laws, we say
       that in law there are three degrees of suspicion in the matter of heresy: the first slight, the
       second great, and the third very great.
             The first is in law called a light suspicion. Of this it is said in the chapter Accusatus, de
       Haeret. Lib. 6: If the accused has incurred only a light and small suspicion, and if she
       should again fall under that suspicion, although she is to be severely punished for this, she
       ought not to suffer the punishment of those who have relapsed into heresy. And this
       suspicion is called small or light, both because it can be removed by a small and light
       defence, and because it arises from small and light conjectures. Therefore it is called small,
       because of the small proofs of it; and light, because of the light conjectures.
             As an example of simple heresy, if people are found to be meeting together secretly for
       the purpose of worship, or differing in their manner of life and behaviour from the usual
       habits of the faithful; or if they meet together in sheds and barns, or at the more Holy
       Seasons in the remoter fields or woods, by day or by night, or are in any way found to

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_19a.html (1 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:11 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XIX

       separate themselves and not to attend Mass at the usual times or in the usual manner, or
       form secret friendships with suspected witches: such people incur at least a light suspicion
       of heresy, because it is proved that heretics often act in this manner. And of this light
       suspicion the Canon says: They who are by a slight argument discovered to have deviated
       from the teaching and path of the Catholic religion are not to be classed as heretics, nor is a
       sentence to be pronounced against them.
             Henry of Segusio agrees with this in his Summa; de Praesumptione, where he says: It
       is to be noted that although a heretic be convicted by a slight argument of that matter of
       which he is suspected, he is not on that account to be considered a heretic; and he proves it
       by the above reasoning.
             The second or grave suspicion is in law called grave or vehement, and of this the above
       Canon (Accusatus) again says: One who is accused or suspected of heresy, against whom a
       grave or vehement suspicion of this crime has arisen, etc. And it goes on: And these are not
       two kinds but the same kind of suspicion. Giovanni d’Andrea also says: Vehement is the
       same as strong, as the Archdeacon says speaking of this Canon. Also Bernardus Papiensis
       and Huguccio say that vehement is the same as strong or great. S. Gregory also, in the First
       Book of his Morals says: A vehement wind sprang up. Therefore we say that anyone has a
       vehement case when he has a strong one. So much for this.
             Therefore a great suspicion is called vehement or strong; and it is so called because it is
       dispelled only by a vehement and strong defence, and because it arises from great,
       vehement, and strong conjectures, arguments, and evidence. As, to take an example of
       simple heresy, when people are found to shelter known heretics, and show favour to them,
       or visit and associate with them and give gifts to them, receive them into their houses and
       protect them, and such like: such people are vehemently suspected of heresy. And similarly
       in the heresy of witches, they are brought under suspicion when they share in the crimes of
       witches.
             And here are especially to be noted those men or women who cherish some inordinate
       love or excessive hatred, even if they do not use to work any harm against men or animals in
       other ways. For, as we have said, those who behave in this way in any heresy are strongly to
       be suspected. And this is shown by the Canon where it says that there is no doubt that such
       persons act in this way out of some heretical sympathy.
             The third and greatest suspicion is in law called grave or violent: for the Canon and the
       glosses of the Archdeacon and Giovanni d’Andrea explain that the word vehement does not
       mean the same as the word violent. And of this suspicion the Canon says (dist. 34): This
       presumption or suspicion is called violent because it violently constrains and compels a
       Judge to believe it, and cannot be cast off by any evasion; and also because it arises from
       violent and convincing conjectures.
             For example, in simple heresy, if persons are found to show a reverent love for
       heretics, to receive consolation or communion from them, or perpetrate any other such
       matter in accordance with their rites and ceremonies: such persons would fall under and be
       convicted of a violent suspicion of heresy and heretical beliefs. (See many chapters on this
       subject in Book VI of the Canon.) For there is no doubt that such persons act in this way out
       of a belief in some heresy.
             It is the same, as regards the heresy of witches, with those who perform and persist in
       performing any of the actions which pertain to the rites of witches. Now these are of various


file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_19a.html (2 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:11 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XIX

       kinds. Sometimes it is only some threatening speech, such as “You shall soon feel what will
       happen to you,” or something similar. Sometimes it is a touch, just laying their hands
       curiously on a man or a beast. Sometimes it is only a matter of being seen, when they show
       themselves by day or by night to others who are sleeping in their beds; and this they do
       when they wish to bewitch men or beasts. But for raising hailstorms they observe various
       other methods and ceremonies, and perform various ritual actions round about a river, as we
       have shown before where we discussed the manner and methods of working witchcraft.
       When such are found and are publicly notorious they are convicted of a violent suspicion of
       the heresy of witchcraft; especially when some effect of witchcraft has followed upon their
       actions, either immediately or after some interval. For then there is direct evidence when
       any instruments of witchcraft are found hidden in some place. And although when some
       interval of time has elapsed the evidence of the fact is not so strong, such a person still
       remains under strong suspicion of witchcraft, and therefore much more of simple heresy.
             And if it be asked whether the devil cannot inflict injury upon men and beasts without
       the means of a woman being seen in a vision or by her touch, we answer that he can, when
       God permits it. But the permission of God is more readily granted in the case of a creature
       that was dedicated to God, but by denying the faith has consented to other horrible crimes;
       and therefore the devil more often uses such means to harm creatures. Further, we may say
       that, although the devil can work without a witch, he yet very much prefers to work with
       one, for the many reasons which we showed earlier in this work.
             To sum up our conclusions on this matter, it is to be said that, following the above
       distinctions, those who are suspected of the heresy of witchcraft are separated into three
       categories, since some are lightly, some strongly, and some gravely suspected. And they are
       lightly suspected who act in such a way as to give rise to a small or light suspicion against
       hem of this heresy. And although, as has been said, a person who is found to be suspected in
       this way is not to be branded as a heretic, yet he must undergo a canonical purgation, or he
       must be caused to pronounce a solemn abjuration as in the case of one convicted of a slight
       heresy.
             For the Canon (cap. excommunicamus) says: Those who have been found to rest under
       a probable suspicion (that is, says Henry of Segusio, a light suspicion), unless, having
       respect to the nature of the suspicion and the quality of their persons, they should prove their
       innocent by a fitting purgation, they are to be stricken with the sword of anathema as a
       worthy satisfaction in the sight of all men. And if they continue obstinate in their
       excommunication for the period of a year, they are to utterly condemned as heretics.
             And note that, in the purgation imposed upon them, whether or not they consent to it,
       and whether or not they fail in it, they are throughout to be judged as reputed heretics on
       whom a canonical purgation is to be imposed.
             And that a person under this light suspicion can and should be caused to pronounce a
       solemn abjuration is shown in the chapter Accusatus, where it says: A person accused or
       suspected of heresy, against whom there is a strong suspicion of this crime, if he abjures the
       heresy before the Judge and afterwards commits it, then, by a sort of legal fiction, he shall
       be judged to have relapsed into heresy, although the heresy was not proved against him
       before his abjuration. But if the suspicion was in the first place a small or light one, although
       such a relapse renders the accused liable to severe punishment, yet he is not to suffer the
       punishment of those who relapse into heresy.
             But those who are strongly suspected, that is, those who have acted in such a way as to

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_19a.html (3 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:11 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XIX

       engender a great and strong suspicion; even those are not necessarily heretics or to be
       condemned as such. For it is expressly stated in the Canon that no one is to be condemned of
       so great a crime by reason of a strong suspicion. And it says:
             Therefore we order that, when the accused is only under suspicion, even if it be a
       strong one, we do not wish him to be condemned of so grave a crime; but such a one so
       strongly suspected must be commanded to abjure all heresy in general, and in particular that
       of which he is strongly suspected.
             But if he afterwards relapses either into his former heresy or into any other, or if he
       associates with those whom he knows to be witches or heretics, or visits them, receives,
       consults with, forgives, or favours them, he shall not escape the punishment of backsliders,
       according to the chapter Accusatus. For it says there: He who has been involved in one kind
       or sect of heresy, or has erred in one article of the faith or sacrament of the Church, and has
       afterwards specifically and generally abjured his heresy: if thereafter he follows another
       kind or sect of heresy, or errs in another article or sacrament of the Church, it is our will that
       he be judged a backslider. He, therefore, who is known to have lapsed into heresy before his
       abjuration, if after his abjuration he receives heretics, visits them, gives or sends them
       presents or gifts, or shows favour to them, etc., he is worthily and truly to judged a
       backslider; for by this proof there is no doubt that he was in the first place guilty. Such is the
       tenor of the Canon.
             From these words it is clear that there are three cases in which a person under strong
       suspicion of heresy shall, after his abjuration, be punished as a backslider. The first is when
       he falls back into the same heresy of which he was strongly suspected. The second is when
       he has abjured al heresy in general, and yet lapses into another heresy, even if he has never
       before been suspected or accused of that heresy. The third is when he receives and shows
       favour to heretics. And this last comprises and embraces many cases.
             But it is asked what should be done when a person who has fallen under so strong a
       suspicion steadily refuses to comply with his Judge’s order to abjure his heresy: is he to be
       at once handed over to the secular Court to be punished? We answer that by no means must
       this be done; for the Canon (ad abolendam) expressly speaks, not of suspects, but of those
       who are manifestly taken in heresy. And more rigorous action is to be employed against
       those who are manifestly taken than against those who are only suspected.
             And if it is asked, How then is such a one to be proceeded against? We answer that the
       Judge must proceed against him in accordance with the chapter excommunicamus, and he
       must be excommunicated. And if he continues obstinate after a year’s excommunication, he
       is to be condemned as a heretic.
             There are others again who are violently or gravely suspected, whose actions give rise
       to a violent suspicion against them; and such a one is to be considered as a heretic, and
       throughout he is to be treated as if he were taken in heresy, in accordance with the Canon
       Law. For these either confess their crime or not; and if they do, and wish to return to the
       faith and abjure their heresy, they are to be received back into penitence. But if they refuse
       to abjure, they are to be handed over to the secular Court for punishment.
             But if he does not confess his crime after he has been convicted, and does not consent
       to abjure his heresy, he is to be condemned as an impenitent heretic. For a violent suspicion
       is sufficient to warrant a conviction, and admits no proof to the contrary.
             Now this discussion deals with simple heresy, where there is no direct or indirect
       evidence of the fact, as will be shown in the sixth method of passing sentence, where a man

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_19a.html (4 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:11 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XIX

       is to be condemned as a heretic even though he may not actually be one: then how much
       more is it applicable to the heresy of witches, where there is always in addition either the
       direct evidence of bewitched children, men, or animals, or the indirect evidence of
       instruments of witchcraft which have been found.
             And although in the case of simple heresy those who are penitent and abjure are, as has
       been said, admitted to penitence and imprisonment for life; yet in this heresy, although the
       ecclesiastic Judge may receive the prisoner into penitence, yet the civil Judge can, because
       of her temporal injuries, that is to say, the harms she has done to men, cattle, and goods,
       punish her with death; nor can the ecclesiastic Judge prevent this, for even if he does not
       hand her over to be punished, yet he is compelled to deliver her up at the request of the civil
       Judge.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                             Question XX

                                                        Main Index


                                                  Part III, Third Head, Question XIX
                                                  was transcribed by Christie Rice.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_19a.html (5 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:11 PM]
Notes

            “Papiensis.” Bernardus Papiensis, a famous and prolific Italian canonist of the
        thirteenth century, who died 18 September, 1213. He was born at Pavia, studied law and
        theology at Bologna, was provost of the Cathedral of Pavia until 1191, Bishop of Faenza
        until 1198, and then Bishop of Pavia until his death. The most celebrated of his many works
        is the “Breuiarium extrauagantium” (later called “Compilatio prima antiqua”), a
        collection of canonical texts comprising ancient canons not inserted in the “Decretum” of
        Gratian, as also various later documents. The work was compiled between 1187 and 1191,
        and was edited by Friedberg, “Quinque compilationes antiquae,” Leipzig, 1882.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/notes/n3019.html [2002-01-20 12:04:11 PM]
Notes

           “Huguccio.” Hugh of Pisa, a distinguished Italian canonist, who died in 1210. He was
        born at Pisa, but the date is unknown. He studied at Bologna, where later he professed
        Canon Law. In 1190 he became Bishop of Ferrara. Among his works are a “Liber
        deruationum” which treats of etymology. He also wrote a “Summa” on the “Decretum” of
        Gratian, which has been considered the most extensive and one of the most valuable
        commentaries of the time. There are, however, certain omissions, but these gaps were filled
        by the industry of Joannes de Deo.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/notes/n3020.html [2002-01-20 12:04:12 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XX


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                        PART III, THIRD HEAD, QUESTION XX.
                                        Of the First Method of Pronouncing Sentence

             SINCE, therefore, the accused is either found innocent and is to be altogether absolved,
       or is found only to be generally defamed as a heretic, or is found a proper subject for the
       questions and the torture on account of her reputation, or is found to be lightly suspected of
       heresy, or is found to be strongly or gravely suspected of heresy, or is found to be at the
       same time commonly defamed and suspected of heresy, or is found to have confessed her
       heresy and to be penitent but probably to have relapsed, or is found to have confessed her
       heresy and to be impenitent but not really to have relapsed, or is found to have confessed but
       by legitimate witnesses and otherwise legally to have been convicted of heresy, or is found
       to have been convicted of heresy but to have escaped or defiantly absented herself, or is
       found not to have done injury by witchcraft but to have removed bewitchments unfittingly
       and by unlawful means, or is found to be an archer-wizard or enchanter of weapons with the
       purpose of causing death, or is found to be a witch-midwife offerings infants to the devil in
       the manner of an enemy, or is found to make frivolous and fraudulent appeals with a view to
       saving her life:
             Therefore, if she is found to be entirely innocent, the final sentence shall be
       pronounced in the following manner:
             Here it is to be noted that the accused is found to be entirely innocent when, after the
       facts of the process have been diligently discussed in consultation with skilled lawyers, she
       cannot be convicted either by her own confession, or by the evidence of the fact, or by the
       production of legitimate witnesses (since they have disagreed upon the main issue); and
       when the accused has never before been suspected of or publicly defamed as regards that
       crime (but the case is different if she has been defamed as regards some other crime); and
       when there is no evidence of the fact against her. In such a case the following procedure is
       observed; for she is to be absolved by the Bishop or Judge by a sentence to the following
       effect:
             We N., by the mercy of God Bishop of such a town (or Judge, etc.), considering that
       you N. of such a place and such a Diocese have been accused before us of the crime of
       heresy and namely of witchcraft; and considering that this accusation was such as we could
       not pass over with connivent eyes, have condescended to inquire whether the aforesaid
       accusation can be substantiated as true, by calling witnesses, by examining you, and by
       using other means which are fitting according to the canonical sanctions. Wherefore having
       diligently seen and examined all that has been done and said in this case, and having had the
       counsel of learned lawyers and Theologians, and having repeatedly examined and inquired
       into all; sitting as Judges on this tribunal and having only God before our eyes and the truth
       of the case, and the Holy Gospels being placed before us that our judgement may proceed
       from the countenance of God and our eyes behold equity, we proceed to our definitive

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_20a.html (1 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:04:12 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XX

       sentence in this way, invoking the name of Christ. Since by that which we have seen and
       heard, and has been produced, offered, done, and executed before us in this present case, we
       have not found that anything has legally been proved against you of those things of which
       you were accused before us, we pronounce, declare, and give it as our final sentence that no
       act has legally been proved to us against you by which you can or ought to be judged a
       heretic or witch of heresy. Wherefore by this present declaration, inquiry, and judgement,
       we freely discharge you. This sentence was given, etc.
            Let care be taken not to put anywhere in the sentence that the accused is innocent or
       immune, but that it was not legally proved against him; for if after a little time he should
       again be brought to trial, and it should be legally proved, he can, notwithstanding the
       previous sentence of absolution, then be condemned.
            Note also that the same method of absolution may be used in the case of one who is
       accused of receiving, protecting, or otherwise comforting and favouring heretics, when
       nothing is legally proved against him.
            A secular Judge commissioned by the Bishop shall use his own manner of
       pronouncement.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                            Question XXI

                                                        Main Index


                                                  Part III, First Head, Question II
                                               was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_20a.html (2 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:04:12 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXI


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                       PART III, THIRD HEAD, QUESTION XXI.
      Of the Second Method of Pronouncing Sentence, when the Accused is no more than Defamed

              THE second method of delivering judgement is to be employed when he or she who is
       accused, after a diligent discussion of the merits of the case in consultation with learned
       lawyers, is found to be no more than defamed as a heretic in some village, town, or
       province. And this is when the accused does not stand convicted either by her own
       confession, or by the evidence of the facts, or by the legitimate production of witnesses; nor
       has there been anything proved against her except that she is the subject of common
       aspersion: so that no particular act of witchcraft can be proved by which she can be brought
       under strong or grave suspicion, as that she has uttered threatening words, for example,
       “You will soon feel what will happen to you,” or something to that effect, and afterwards
       some injury has befallen the person or the cattle of the man she threatened.
              The following procedure, therefore, is to be employed in the case of such a one against
       whom nothing has been proved except public obloquy. In this case judgement cannot be
       delivered for the accused, nor can she be absolved as in the first method; but a canonical
       purgation must be imposed upon her. Therefore let the Bishop or his deputy, or the Judge,
       first take note that, in a case of heresy, it is not necessary that a person should be defamed
       only by good and respected people; for the calumniation uttered by common and simple folk
       carries equal weight.
              And the reason for this is, that the same persons who are admitted as accusers in a case
       of heresy are also admitted as detractors. Now any heretic can be accused by anybody,
       except his mortal enemies; therefore he can also be defamed by anybody.
              Therefore let the Bishop or Judge pronounce his sentence of canonical purgation in this
       or some similar manner:
              We N., by the mercy of God Bishop of such a city, or Judge of such a county, having
       diligently examined the merits of the process conducted by us against you N. of such a
       Diocese accused before us of the crime of heresy, etc. We have not found that you have
       confessed to or have been convicted of the aforesaid sin or that you are even lightly
       suspected of it, except that we find that truly and legitimately you are publicly defamed by
       both good and bad in such a village, town, or Diocese; and that you may be in good odour
       among the company of the faithful we impose upon you as by law a canonical purgation,
       assigning to you such a day of such a month at such hour of the day, upon which you shall
       appear in person before us with so many persons of equal station with you to purge you of
       your defamation. Which sponsors must be men of the Catholic faith and of good life who
       have known your habits and manner of living not only recently but in time past. And we
       signify that, if you should fail in this purgation, we shall hold you convicted, according to
       the canonical sanctions.
              Here it is to be considered that, when a person is duly found to be publicly defamed of

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_21a.html (1 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:12 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXI

       some heresy, and nothing is proved against him except that defamation, a canonical
       purgation shall be imposed upon him. That is, he must produce some seven, ten, twenty, or
       thirty men, according to the extent to which he has been defamed and the size and important
       of the place concerned, and these must be men of his own station and condition. For
       example, if he who is defamed is a religious, they must be religious; if he is a secular, they
       must be seculars; if he be a solder, they must be soldiers who purge him from the crime for
       which he is defamed. And these sponsors must be men professing the Catholic faith and of
       good life, who have known his habits and life both recently and for a long time.
             But if he refuses this purgation, he must be excommunicated; and if he remains
       obstinate in that excommunication for a year, he is then to be condemned as a heretic.
             And if he accepts the purgation and fails in it; that is, if he cannot find sponsors of the
       number and quality desired; he shall be considered as convicted, and is to be condemned as
       a heretic.
             And it must here be remarked that, when it is said that he must purge himself by means
       of so many men of his own station in life, this is meant generically and not specifically.
       Thus, if a Bishop is to be purged, it is not necessary that all his sponsors should be Bishops;
       but Abbots and other religious who are priests are admitted; and similarly in other cases.
             And the defamed person shall purge himself in the following manner. At the time
       assigned to him for his canonical purgation, he shall appear in person with his sponsors
       before the Bishop who is his Judge, in the place where he is known to be defamed; and,
       placing his hand upon the Book of the Gospels set before him, he shall say as follows:
             I swear upon these four Holy Gospels of God that I never held, believed or taught,
       neither do I hold or believe such heresy (naming it) for which I am defamed.
             That is to say, he shall deny on oath whatever it is for which he is defamed.
             After this, all his sponsors shall place their hands on the Gospels; and each of them
       severally shall say: And I swear upon this Holy Gospel of God that I believe him to have
       sworn the truth. And then he is canonically purged.
             It is also to be noted that a person defamed of heresy is to be purged in the place where
       he is known to be defamed. And if he has been defamed in many places, he must be required
       to profess the Catholic faith and deny the heresy in all the places in which he is known as
       defamed.
             And let not such a person hold in light esteem this canonical purgation. For it is
       provided by the Canon Law that, if he afterwards falls into the heresy of which he has been
       purged, he is to be handed over as a backslider to the secular Court. But the case is
       somewhat different if he falls into some other heresy, of which he has not before been
       purged.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                           Question XXII

                                                        Main Index




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_21a.html (2 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:12 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXI

                                                  Part III, Third Head, Question XXI
                                                  was transcribed by Christie Rice.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_21a.html (3 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:12 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXII


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                       PART III, THIRD HEAD, QUESTION XXII.
 Of the Third Kind of Sentence, to be Pronounced on one who is Defamed, and who is to be put to the
                                             Question

             THE Third method of bringing a process on behalf of the faith to a conclusive
       termination is when the person accused of heresy, after a careful consideration of the merits
       of the process in consultation with learned lawyers, is found to be inconsistent in his
       statements, or is found that there are sufficient grounds to warrant his exposure to the
       question and torture: so that if, after he has been thus questioned, he confesses nothing, he
       may be considered innocent. And this is when the prisoner has not been taken in heresy, nor
       has he been convicted by his own confession, or by the evidence of the facts, or by the
       legitimate production of witnesses, and there are no indications that he is under such a
       suspicion as to warrant his being made to abjure the heresy; but nevertheless he is
       inconsistent in his answers when interrogated. Or there may be other sufficient reasons for
       exposing him to torture. And in such a case the following procedure is to be observed.
             And because such a judgement in includes an interlocutory sentence which must be
       against and not for the prisoner, the Inquisitor must not divide it into two sentences, but
       include it all in one. And in the first place, if the accused remains firm in his denials and can
       in no way be induced by honest men to confess the truth, the following manner of sentence,
       which is in some respects definitive, shall be used.
             We N., by the mercy of God Bishop of such a town, or Judge in the territory subject to
       the rule of such a Prince, having regard to the merits of the process conducted by us against
       you N., of such a place in such a Diocese, and after careful examination, find that you are
       not consistent in your answers, and that there are sufficient indications besides that you
       ought to be exposed to the question and torture. Therefore, that the truth may be known
       from your own mouth and that from henceforth you may not offend the ears of your Judges
       with your equivocations, we declare, pronounce, and give sentence that on this present day
       at such an hour you are to be subjected to an interrogatory under torture. This sentence was
       given, etc.
             If the person to be questioned is both found to be equivocal and at the same time there
       are other indications sufficient to warrant his being tortured, let both these facts be included
       in the sentence, as they are above. But if only one or the other of these hold good, let that
       one only be put in the sentence. But let the sentence be soon put into execution, or let them
       make as if to execute it. Nevertheless let not the Judge be too willing to subject a person to
       torture, for this should only be resorted to in default of other proofs. Therefore let him seek
       for other proofs; and if he cannot find them, and thinks it probable that the accused is guilty,
       but denied the truth out of fear, let him use other approved methods, always with due
       precautions, and by using the persuasions of the friends of the accused do his utmost to
       extract the truth from his own lips. And let him not hasten the business; for very often

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_22a.html (1 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:13 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXII

       meditation, and the ordeal of imprisonment, and the repeated persuasion of honest men will
       induce the accused to discover the truth.
             But if, after keeping the accused in suspense, and after due and decent postponements
       of the time, and many exhortations of the accused, the Bishop and the Judge are well
       persuaded that, all circumstances considered, the accused is denying the truth, let them
       torture him slightly, without shedding blood, bearing in mind that torture is often fallacious
       and ineffective. For some are so soft-hearted and feeble-minded that at the least torture they
       will confess anything, whether it be true or not. Others are so stubborn that, however much
       they are tortured, the truth is not to be had from them. There are others who, having been
       tortured before, are the better able to endure it a second time, since their arms have been
       accomodated to the stretchings and twistings involved; whereas the effect on others is to
       make them weaker, so that they can the less easily endure torture. Others are bewitched, and
       make use of the fact in their torture, so that they will die before the will confess anything;
       for they become, as it were, insensible to pain. Therefore there is need for much prudence in
       the matter of torture, and the greatest attention is to be given to the condition of the person
       who is to be tortured.
             When, then, the sentence has been pronounced, the officers shall without delay prepare
       to torture the accused. And while they are making their preparations, the Bishop or Judge
       shall use his own persuasions and those of other honest men zealous for the faith to induce
       the accused to confess the truth freely, if necessary promising to spare his life, as we have
       shown above.
             But if the accused cannot thus be terrified into telling the truth, a second or third day
       may be appointed for the continuation of the torture; but it must not be repeated then and
       there. For such a repetition is not permissible unless some further indications against the
       accused should transpire. But there is nothing to prevent a continuation of the torture on
       another day.
             Let it be said: We N. Bishop and N. Judge (if he is present) aforesaid, assign to you N.
       such a day for the continuation of the torture, that the truth may be known from your own
       mouth. And let all be set down in the process. And during the interval appointed to him, let
       them use their own persuasions and those of other honest men to induce him to confess the
       truth.
             But if he has refused to confess, the torture can be continued on the day assigned, more
       or less severely according to the gravity of the offences in question. And the Judges will be
       able to observe many lawful precautions, both in word and deed, by which they may come
       at the truth; but these are more easily learned by use and experience and the variety of
       different cases than by the art of teaching of anyone.
             But if, after having been fittingly questioned and tortured, he will not discover the
       truth, let him not be further molested, but be freely allowed to depart. If, however, he
       confesses, and abides by his confession, and uncovers the truth, acknowledging his guilt and
       asking the pardon of the Church; then according to the Canon ad abolendam he is to be
       treated as one taken in heresy on his own confession, but penitent, and he must abjure the
       heresy, and sentence must be pronounced against him as in the case of those who are
       convicted by their own confession as being taken in heresy. This will be explained in the
       eighth method of sentencing such, to which the reader may refer.
             If, on the other hand, he confesses the truth, but is not penitent but obstinately persists
       in his heresy, but is not a relapsed heretic, then according to the Canon, after a decent

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_22a.html (2 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:13 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXII

       interval and due warning, he is to be condemned as a heretic and handed over to the secular
       Court to suffer the extreme penalty, as we show later in the tenth method. But if he is a
       relapsed heretic, he is to be condemned in the way which is again explained in the tenth
       method, to which the reader may refer.
             But here it must be particularly noted that in some instances he who is to be questioned
       confesses nothing against himself before the torture, nor is anything proved on the strength
       of which he can be required to abjure the heresy or be condemned as a heretic; and in such
       cases the above procedure should be adopted, as we have said, immediately. But in other
       cases the accused is taken in heresy, or he is to be considered either lightly or strongly
       suspected; and he is not to be tortured in respect of such matters; but if, apart from these, he
       denies some points which are not proved, but of which there is sufficient indication to
       warrant his being tortured; and if, having been questioned as to these under torture, he
       confesses to none of them, he is not on that account to be absolved in accordance with the
       first method; but he must be proceeded against according to that which has been proved
       against him, and he or she must abjure the heresy as being one under suspicion of or taken in
       heresy, as the merits of the process may exact or require. And if, after torture, he confesses
       all or part of that for which he was tortured, then he must abjure both this and the former
       heresy which was proved against him, and sentence must be pronounced against him in
       respect of both of these.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                           Question XXIII

                                                        Main Index


                                                Part III, Third Head, Question XXII
                                               was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_22a.html (3 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:13 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXIII


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                       PART III, THIRD HEAD, QUESTION XXIII.
            The Fourth Method of Sentencing, in the Case of one Accused upon a Light Suspicion

             THE fourth method of concluding the process on behalf of the faith is used when, after
       the merits of the process have been diligently examined in consultation with expert lawyers,
       the accused is found to rest under only a light suspicion of heresy. And this is when the
       accused is not taken in heresy, nor is convicted by her own confession or by the evidence of
       the facts or by the legitimate production of witnesses, and there are no other strong or
       vehement indications of heresy against her; but only a small and light indications of such a
       sort as, in the opinion of the Court, to engender a light suspicion against her. And such a one
       must be required to abjure the heresy of which she is accused; and then, if she relapses into
       heresy, she is not liable to the punishment of backsliders, although she must be more
       severely punished than would be the case if she had not previously abjured the heresy (see
       the Canon c. accusatus). The following procedure shall be followed in such a case. For such
       an accused, if the matter be a public one, will publicly make the following abjuration in the
       Church:
             I, N., of such a Diocese, a citizen of such a city or place, being on my trial, do swear
       before you the Lord Bishop of such a city, and upon the Holy Gospels placed before me and
       upon which I set my hand, that I believe in my heart and profess with my lips that Holy
       Catholic and Apostolic Faith which the Holy Roman Church believes, confesses, preaches,
       and observes. Also I swear that I believe in my heart and profess with my lips that the Lord
       JESUS Christ, in company with all the Saints, abominates the wicked heresy of witches; and
       that all who follow or adhere to it will with the devil and his Angels be punished in eternal
       fire unless they turn their hearts and are reconciled by the penitence of the Holy Church.
       And there I abjure, renounce, and revoke that heresy of which you, my Lord Bishop, and
       your Officers hold me suspected: namely, that I have been familiar with witches, have
       ignorantly defended their errors, have held in detestation their Inquisitors and prosecutors,
       or that I have failed to bring their crimes to light. Also I swear that I have never believed the
       aforesaid heresy, nor do I believe, nor have I adhered, nor do I adhered to it, nor shall I ever
       believe, adhere to, or teach it, nor do I intend to teach it. And if I should hereafter be guilty
       of any of the aforesaid practices (which God forbid), I shall willingly submit myself to the
       punishment provided by law for such who are so forsworn; and I am ready to undergo any
       penance which you see fit to enjoin me for those words or deeds of mine for which you hold
       me deservedly suspect; and I swear to fulfill such penance to the best of my strength, and to
       omit no part of it, so help me God and these Holy Gospels.
             The above abjuration shall be made in the common speech, so that all may understand
       it. And when it is done, the Judge, if he is present, or his deputy shall speak to her in the
       common speech to the following effect:
             My son (or daughter), you have not unworthily abjured the suspicion which we

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_23a.html (1 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:04:13 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXIII

       entertained of you, and have purged yourself by the aforesaid abjuration. Beware then lest
       hereafter you fall into the heresy you have abjured. For although, if you should repent, you
       would not be delivered up to the secular Court, since you made your abjuration as one under
       a light, and not a strong, suspicion, yet you wold then be far more severely punished than
       you would have been if you had not abjured, and you would then rest under a strong instead
       of a light suspicion. And when you should abjure as such, and afterwards should relapse,
       you would suffer the due punishment of a backslider, and would without mercy be delivered
       to the secular Court to endure the extreme penalty.
             But if she makes her abjuration secretly in the chamber of the Bishop or Judge, which
       will be the case when the matter is not a public one, she shall abjure in the same manner.
       And afterwards sentence shall be pronounced as follows:
             We, by the mercy of God Bishop of such a city, or (if he is present) Judge in the
       territory subject to such a Prince, having carefully seen and examined the merits of the
       process conducted by us against you N., accused before us heresy, find that you have
       committed such and such (naming them) which render you lightly suspected of heresy, on
       account of which we have judged it proper to cause you to abjure that heresy as one lightly
       suspected of it. But not for that can you be dismissed unpunished. And that you may become
       more careful in the future, having consulted with many eminent persons learned in the law
       and with religious men, and having carefully weighed and digested the whole matter, having
       only God before our eyes, and the irrefragable truth of the Holy Catholic Faith, and with the
       Holy Gospels placed before us that our sentence may proceed as from God’s countenance
       and that our eyes may see with equity, and sitting in tribunal as Judge, we condemn,
       sentence, or rather impose penance upon you N., standing in person here in our presence, in
       the following manner. Namely, that never hereafter shall you knowingly hold to, associate
       with, defend in your speech, read (if you are well learned), or hereafter, etc. and let there be
       set down that which she has committed, on account of which she was held suspected of the
       crime of heresy. This sentence and penance were given, etc.
             And let the Notary take care that he sets it down in the process that such abjuration was
       made as by one under a light, not a strong, suspicion of heresy; for otherwise great danger
       might ensue.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                          Question XXIV

                                                        Main Index


                                                 Part III, Third Head, Question XXIII
                                                  was transcribed by Christie Rice.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_23a.html (2 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:04:13 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXIV


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                      PART III, THIRD HEAD, QUESTION XXIV.
                     The Fifth Manner of Sentence, in the Case of one under Strong Suspicion

            THE fifth method of concluding a process on behalf of the faith is used when she who
       is accused of heresy, after a careful examination of the merits of the process in consultation
       with learned lawyers, is found to be strongly suspected of heresy. And this is when the
       accused is not legally taken in heresy, nor has been convicted by her own confession or by
       the evidence of the facts or by the legitimate production of witnesses; but strong and
       weighty indications have been proved against her by reason of which she is held to be under
       strong suspicion of heresy.
            The procedure in such a case is as follows. For such a person should abjure that heresy
       as one strongly suspected of it, in such a manner that, if she should afterwards relapse, she
       must be delivered to the secular Court to suffer the extreme penalty. And she shall make her
       abjuration publicly or secretly according to whether she is publicly or secretly suspected, or
       by more or less, high or low, as was just said in the case of one under a light suspicion; and
       she must abjure that specific heresy.
            And the preparations for such an abjuration should be as follows: - When the Sunday
       comes which has been fixed for the abjuration and the hearing of the sentence or the
       imposition of the penance, the preacher shall deliver a general sermon. After this, the Notary
       or clerk shall publicly read out the crimes of which the accused has been convicted, and
       those of which she is strongly suspected as a heretic.
            Then the Judge or his deputy shall say to her: Behold! according to that which has been
       read you are strongly suspected by us of such heresy; wherefore it behoves you to purge
       yourself and abjure the aforesaid heresy. And then the Book of the Gospels shall be placed
       before her, and she shall set her hand upon it; and if she can read competently, she shall be
       given the following written abjuration, and shall read it in the presence of the whole
       congregation.
            But if she cannot read competently, the Notary shall read it phrase by phrase, and the
       accused shall repeat it in a loud and audible voice in the following manner. The Notary or
       clerk shall say: I, N., of such a place, and the accused person shall repeat after him the same
       words, but always in the vulgar tongue. And so on up to the end of the abjuration. And she
       shall abjure in the following manner.
            I, N., of such a place in such a Diocese, standing my trial in person in presence of you
       reverend Lords the Bishop of such city and the Judge of the territory subject to the rule of
       such a Lord, upon the Holy Gospels set before me and touched by my hands, I swear that I
       believe in my heart and profess with my lips that Holy Catholic and Apostolic Faith which
       the Holy Roman Church teaches, professes, preaches, and holds. Also I swear that I believe
       in my heart and profess with my lips that, etc. And let her pronounce the Catholic article of
       the faith against that heresy of which she is strongly suspected.

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_24a.html (1 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:14 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXIV

              For example, if the heresy of witchcraft is in question, let her say as follows:
              I swear that I believe that not only will simple heretics and schismatics be tortured in
       fire everlasting, but that those above all will be so punished who are infected with the heresy
       of witches, who deny before the devil that faith which they received in Holy Baptism at the
       font, and practise demoniac lewdness for the fulfilment of their evil desires, inflicting all
       sorts of injuries upon men and animals and the fruits of the earth. And consequently I
       abjure, renounce, and revoke that heresy, or rather infidelity, which falsely and
       mendaciously maintains that there are no witches in the world, and that no one ought to
       believe that those injuries can be caused with the help of devils; for such infidelity is, as I
       now recognize, expressly contrary to the decision of our Holy Mother the Church and of all
       the Catholic Doctors, as also against the Imperial laws which have decreed that witches are
       to be burned.
              Also I swear that I have never persistently believed in the aforesaid heresy, neither do I
       believe nor adhere to it at the present, nor have I taught it, not intend to teach it, nor shall
       teach it. Also I swear and promise that I will never do or cause to be done such and such
       (naming them) of which you hold me strongly suspected as a heretic. And if hereafter
       (which God forbid) I should do any of the aforesaid, I am ready the undergo the punishment
       provided by law for backsliders; and I am ready to submit myself to any penance which you
       decide to impose upon me for those deeds and words of mine for which you hold me
       strongly suspected of the said heresy. And I swear and promise that I will perform it to the
       best of my strength, and will omit no part of it, so God and this Holy Gospel help me.
              And the said abjuration shall be made in the vulgar tongue so that it may be understood
       by all, unless it be made only in the presence of Clerics with a competent knowledge of the
       Latin tongue. But if the abjuration be made secretly in the Bishop's palace or chamber, when
       it is not a public matter, it shall be made in a similar manner. And afterwards the Bishop
       shall admonish her as above to beware lest she relapse and incur the penalty of a backslider.
       And let the Notary take care that he set it down how such abjuration was made by such a
       person as one strongly suspected of heresy, so that, if she should relapse, she may be
       punished as is proper for a backslider.
              And when this has been done, let the sentence or penance be pronounced in the
       following manner:
              We, N., Bishop of such city, and Brother N. (if he is present), Inquisitor of the sin of
       heresy in the domains subject to the rule of such a Prince, especially deputed by the Holy
       Apostolic See: having in mind that you, N., of such a place in such a Diocese, have done
       such and such (naming them), as lawfully appears from the carefully examined merits of the
       process, wherefore we reasonably hold you strongly suspected of such heresy, and have
       caused you to abjure it as one so suspected, being persuaded to that course by considerations
       of justice and the advice of men skilled in the law. But that you may be more careful in the
       future nor become more prone to the like practices, and that your crimes may not remain
       unpunished, and that you may be an example to other sinners; having consulted with many
       eminent and learned lawyers and Masters or Doctors of the faculty of Theology, having
       carefully digested the whole matter, and having before our eyes only God and the truth of
       the Catholic Apostolic Faith, having set before us the Holy Gospel that our judgement may
       proceed as from God's countenance and our eyes see with equity, and sitting in tribunal as
       Judges, we condemn, or rather impose penance in the following manner upon you, N.,
       standing here in person before us: namely, that you shall never hereafter presume to do, say,

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_24a.html (2 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:14 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXIV

       or teach such and such things. And let there be set down those things of which she has been
       convicted, and by reason of which she was strongly suspected of the aforesaid heresy, as
       well as certain others which, if she were to commit them, would make her guilty of a slight
       relapse into heresy; but this must be as the particular nature of the case demands and
       requires. As, for example, that she should never wittingly follow such practices, nor receive
       those whom she knows to have denied the faith, etc. This sentence was given, etc.
            But it must be noted that those who are suspected, but not taken in heresy, whether they
       be strongly or lightly suspected, must not be imprisoned or confined for life. For this is the
       punishment of those who have been heretics and afterwards repented. But they may, because
       of their deeds for which they have come under suspicion, be sent to prison for a time, and
       afterwards, as will be seen, released.
            Neither are they to be branded with the sign of the Cross, for such is the sign of a
       penitent heretic; and they are not convicted heretics, but only suspected, therefore they are
       not to be marked in this way. But they can be ordered either to stand on certain solemn days
       within the doors of a church, or near the altar, while Holy Mass is being celebrated, bearing
       in their hands a lighted candle of a certain weight; or else to go on some pilgrimage, or
       something of the kind, according to the nature and requirements of the case.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                           Question XXV

                                                        Main Index


                                                Part III, Third Head, Question XXIV
                                               was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_24a.html (3 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:14 PM]
Notes

           “A Certain Weight.” This was exactly specified when someone was delivered. Thus
        Urbain Grandier on 18 August, 1634, at Loudun, was sentenced “to make honourable
        amends, with bare head, a rope around his neck, and with a burning torch of two pounds’
        weight in his hand, before the principal door of the church of Saint-Pierre du Marché, and
        before that of Sainte Ursule of this town, and there, upon his knees, to ask pardon of God
        and the King.” His execution followed.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/notes/n3024.html [2002-01-20 12:04:14 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXV


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                       PART III, THIRD HEAD, QUESTION XXV.
                       The Sixth Kind of Sentence, in the Case of one who is Gravely Suspect

             THE sixth method of bringing to a conclusion a process on behalf of the faith is used
       when the person accused of heresy, after a careful examination of the merits of the process
       in consultation with learned lawyers, is found to be gravely suspected of heresy. And this is
       when the accused is not convicted of heresy by her own confession or by the evidence of the
       facts or by the legitimate productions of witnesses, but there are indications, not only light
       or even strong, but very strong and grave, which render her gravely suspected of the said
       heresy, and by reason of which she must be judged as one gravely suspected of the said
       heresy.
             And for a clearer understanding of this, we shall give examples both of a case of simple
       heresy and of the heresy of witches. For the case would fall under this head in simple heresy
       if the accused were not lawfully found convicted by his own confession, etc. as above, but
       for something which he had said or done. As, for example, he may have been summoned in
       a case not concerning the faith, and have been sentenced to excommunication; and if he
       should continue obstinate in excommunication for a year or more, he would come under a
       light suspicion of heresy; for such behaviour is not without some suspicion of heresy. But if
       he should then be summoned on a charge concerning the faith, and should not appear but
       contumaciously refuse to appear, and therefore be excommunicated, then he would be
       strongly suspected of heresy; for then the light suspicion would become a strong one. And if
       he remained obstinate in that excommunication for a year, then he would be gravely
       suspected of heresy; for then the strong suspicion would become a grave one, against which
       no defence is admitted. And from that time such a person would be condemned as a heretic,
       as is shown by the Canon, c. cum contumacia, lib. 6.
             An example of a grave suspicion in the heresy of witches would be when the accused
       has said or done anything which is practised by witches when they wish to bewitch anyone.
       And it commonly happens that they are constrained to manifest themselves by threatening
       words, by deeds, by a look or a touch, and this is for three reasons. First that their sins may
       be aggravated and more manifest to the their Judges; secondly, that they may be the more
       easily seduce the simple; and thirdly, that God may be the more offended and they may be
       granted more power of injuring men. Therefore a witch must be gravely suspected when,
       after she has used such threatening words as “I will soon make you feel,” or the like, some
       injury has befallen the person so threatened or his cattle. For then she is not to be considered
       as lightly suspected, as was the case with those who are familiar with witches, or those who
       wish to provoke someone to inordinate love. See above where we deal with the three
       degrees of suspicion, light, strong, and grave.
             Now we must consider what procedure is to be observed in such a case. For in the case
       of one gravely suspected of simple heresy, the following is the procedure. Although he may

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_25a.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:04:15 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXV

       not in actual truth be a heretic, since there may not be any error in his understanding, or if
       there is, he may not cling obstinately to it in his will: nevertheless he is to be condemned as
       a heretic because of the said grave suspicion, against which no proof is admitted.
             Such a heretic is condemned in this manner. If he refuses to return and abjure his
       heresy and give fitting satisfaction, he is delivered to the secular Court to be punished. But if
       he is willing and consents, he abjures his heresy and is imprisoned for life. And the same
       holds good in the case of one gravely suspected of the heresy of witches.
             But although the same method in the main is to be observed in the case of one gravely
       suspected of the heresy of witches, there are some differences. It is to be noted that, if the
       witch maintains her denial, or claims that she uttered those words not with the implied
       intention but in a vehement and womanish passion; then the Judge has not sufficient warrant
       to sentence her to the flames, in spite of the grave suspicion. Therefore he must place her in
       prison, and cause inquiry to be made by proclamation whether she has been known to have
       done the like before. And if it is found that this is so, he must inquire whether she was then
       publicly defamed in respect of that heresy; and from this he can proceed further so that,
       before all else, she may be exposed to an interrogation under the question and torture. And
       then, if she shows signs of such heresy, or of the taciturnity of witches; as that she should be
       unable to shed tears, or remain insensible under torture and quickly recover her strength
       afterwards; then he may proceed with the various precautions which we have already
       explained where we dealt with such cases.
             And in case all should fail, then let him take note that, if she has perpetrated the like
       before, she is not to be altogether released, but must be sent to the squalor of prison for a
       year, and be tortured, and be examined very often, especially on the more Holy Days. But if,
       in addition to this, she has been defamed, then the Judge may proceed in the manner already
       shown in the case of simple heresy, and condemn her to the fire, especially if there is a
       multitude of witnesses and she had often been detected in similar or other deeds of
       witchcraft. But if he wishes to be merciful, he may set her a canonical purgation, that she
       should find twenty or thirty sponsors, sentencing her in such a way that, if she should fail in
       her purgation, she shall be condemned to the fire as convicted. And the Judge can proceed in
       such a manner.
             And if she should purge herself, then the Judge must sentence her to an abjuration of all
       heresy, on pain of the punishment for backsliders, together with the perpetual penance, in
       the following manner. The preparations for the abjuration will be the same as were
       explained in the fourth and fifth methods of concluding a process on behalf of the faith.
             Note that in all the following methods of pronouncing sentence, when the Judge wishes
       to proceed in a merciful manner he can act in the way we have already explained. But since
       secular Judges use their own various methods, proceeding with rigour but not always with
       equity, no fixed rule or method can be given for them as it can for an ecclesiastical Judge,
       who can receive the abjuration and impose a perpetual penance in the following manner:
             I, N., of such a place in such a Diocese, standing in person before you my venerable
       Lords the Bishop of such city and Judges, having touched with my hands the Holy Gospel
       placed before me, swear that I believe in my heart and profess with my lips the Holy
       Catholic and Apostolic Faith which the Holy Roman Church holds, professes, believes,
       preaches and teaches. And consequently I abjure all heresy, and renounce and revoke all
       who raise themselves against the Holy Roman and Apostolic Church, of whatever sect or
       error they be. Also I swear and promise that I shall never henceforward do, say, or cause to

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_25a.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:04:15 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXV

       be done such and such (naming them) which I have done and said, and for which, in my
       guilt, you hold me gravely suspected of the said heresy. Also I swear and promise that I will
       perform every penance which you wish to impose upon me for the said crimes to the best of
       my strength, and that I will not omit any part of it, so help me God and the Holy Gospel.
       And if (which God forbid) I should hereafter act in contravention of this abjuration, I here
       and now bind and oblige myself to suffer the due punishments for backsliders, however
       sever they may be.
             Let the Notary take care to set it down that the said abjuration was made by one gravely
       suspected of heresy, so that if she should be proved to have relapsed, she should then be
       judged accordingly and delivered up to the secular Court.
             After this let the Bishop absolve her from the sentence of excommunication which she
       has incurred as one gravely suspected of heresy. For when a heretic returns to the faith and
       abjures his heresy, he is to be released from the sentence of excommunication which is
       passed on all heretics. Similarly, such a one as we are considering was condemned as a
       heretic, as we have said; but after she has abjured her heresy she is to be released from
       excommunication; and after this absolution she is to be sentenced in the following manner:
             We N., Bishop of such city, and, if he is present, Judge in the territory of such Lord,
       seeing that you N., of such a place in such a Diocese, have been accused before us of such
       and such touching the faith (naming them), and that we have proceeded to inform ourselves
       concerning them as justice demanded by a careful examination of the merits of the process
       and of all that has been done and said in the present case, have found that you have
       committed such and such (naming them). Wherefore, and not without reason holding you
       gravely suspected of such heresy (naming it), we have caused you as one so suspected
       publicly to abjure all heresy in general, as the canonical sanctions bid us. And since
       according to those same canonical institutions all such are to be condemned as heretics, but
       you holding to wiser counsel and returning to the bosom of our Holy Mother the Church
       have abjured, as we have said, all vile heresy, therefore we absolve you from the sentence of
       excommunication by which you were deservedly bound as one hateful to the Church of
       God. And if with true heart and faith unfeigned you have returned to the unity of the
       Church, you shall be reckoned from henceforth among the penitent, and as from now are
       received back into the merciful bosom of the Holy Church. But since it would be most
       scandalous to pass over with connivent eyes and leave unpunished your offences against
       God and your injuries to men, for it is a graver matter to offend the Divine Majesty than a
       human monarch, and that your crimes may not be an incentive for other sinners, and that
       you may become more careful in the future and less prone to commit again the aforesaid
       crimes, and may suffer the less punishment in the next world: We the aforesaid Bishop and
       Judge, having availed ourselves of the wise and considered advice of learned men in this
       matter, sitting in tribunal as Judges judging, having before our eyes only God and the
       irrefragable truth of the Holy Faith, with the Holy Gospels placed before us that our
       judgement may proceed as from the countenance of God and our eyes see with equity,
       sentence and condemn, or rather impose penance in the following manner upon you N.,
       appearing in person before us on the day and at the hour which was before assigned to you.
       First, you shall put on over all the garments which you wear a grey-blue garment after the
       manner of a monk’s scapulary, made without a hood either before or behind, and having
       upon it crosses of yellow cloth three palms long and two palms wide, and you shall wear
       this garment over all others for such a length of time (setting a period of one or two years,

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_25a.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:04:15 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXV

       more or less as the guilt of the person demands), And in the said garment and crosses you
       shall stand in the door of such a church at such a time for so long, or on the four major
       Feasts of the Glorious Virgin, or in such and such cities in the doors of such and such
       churches; and we sentence and condemn you for life, or for such a period, to such a prison.
       (Let this be set down as seems most to the honour of the faith, and according to the greater
       or less guilt and obstinacy of the accused.) And we expressly, and in the sure knowledge
       that it is so ordained by canonical institution, reserve to ourselves the right to mitigate the
       said penance, to increase it, change it, or remove it, in whole or in part, as often as seems
       good to us. This sentence was given, etc.
             And when this has been read, it shall at once be duly put into execution, and she shall
       be clothed with the aforesaid garment with the crosses as has been said.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                          Question XXVI

                                                        Main Index


                                                Part III, Third Head, Question XXV
                                               was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_25a.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:04:15 PM]
Notes

           “Four Major Feasts.” Presumably the Annunciation, the Visitation, Assumption, and
        Nativity of Our Lady are intended. Candlemas, which in the Middle Ages had an octave in
        many dioceses, may be intended instead of the Visitiation. The last Pope, Sixtus IV, had in
        1470 published a work on the Immaculate Conception. By a decree of 28 February, 1476,
        this Pontiff adopted the Feast of Our Lady's Conception for the entire Latin Church and
        granted an indulgence to all who should assist at the Divine Office of this Solemnity.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/notes/n3025.html [2002-01-20 12:04:15 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXVI


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                      PART III, THIRD HEAD, QUESTION XXVI.
                  The Method of passing Sentence upon one who is both Suspect and Defamed

             THE seventh method of bringing to a conclusion a process on behalf of the faith is
       employed when the person accused of the sin of heresy, after a careful examination of the
       merits of the process in consultation with men learned in the law, is found to be both
       suspected and defamed of heresy. And this is when the accused is not legally convicted by
       his own confession or by the evidence of the facts or by the legitimate production of
       witnesses; but is found to be publicly defamed, and there are also other indications which
       render him lightly or strongly suspected of heresy: as that he has held much familiarity with
       heretics. And such a person must, because of his defamation, undergo a canonical purgation;
       and because of the suspicion against him he must abjure the heresy.
             The procedure in such a case will be as follows. Such a person, being publicly defamed
       for heresy, and being in addition to this suspected of heresy by reason of certain other
       indications, shall first publicly purge himself in the manner which we explained in the
       second method. Having performed this purgation, he shall immediately, as one against
       whom there are other indications of the suspected heresy, abjure that heresy in the following
       manner, having before him, as before, the Book of the Gospels:
             I., N., of such a place in such a Diocese, standing my trial in person before you my
       Lords, N., Bishop of such city and Judge in the territory of such Prince, having touched with
       my hands the Holy Gospels placed before me, swear that I believe in my heart and profess
       with my lips that Holy Apostolic Faith which the Roman Church believes, professes,
       preaches and observes. And consequently I abjure, detest, renounce and revoke every heresy
       which rears itself up against the Holy and Apostolic Church, of whatever sect or error it be,
       etc., as above.
             Also I swear and promise that I will never hereafter do or say or cause to be done such
       and such (naming them), for which I am justly defamed as having committed them, and of
       which you hold be suspected. Also I swear and promise that I will perform to the best of my
       strength every penance which you impose on me, nor will I omit any part of it, so help me
       God and this Holy Gospel. And if hereafter I should act in any way contrary to this oath and
       abjuration (which God forbid), I here and now freely submit, oblige, and bind myself to the
       legal punishment for such, to the limit of sufferance, when it shall have been proved that I
       have committed such things.
             But it must be noted that when the indications are so strong as to render the accused,
       either with or without the aforesaid defamation, strongly suspected of heresy, then he shall,
       as above, abjure all heresy in general. And if he relapsed into any heresy, he shall suffer the
       due punishment of a backslider. But if the indications are so small and slight as, even taken
       together with the said defamation, not to render him strongly, but only lightly, suspected of
       heresy, then it is enough if he makes not a general abjuration, but specifically abjures that

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_26a.html (1 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:16 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXVI

       heresy of which he is suspected; so that, if he were to relapse into another form of heresy, he
       would not be liable to the penalty for backsliders. And even if he were to relapse into the
       same heresy which he had abjured, he would still not be liable to the said penalty, although
       he would be more severely punished than would have been the case if he had not abjured.
             But there is a doubt whether he would be liable to the penalty for backsliders if, after
       his canonical purgation, he should relapse into the same heresy of which he was canonically
       purged. And it would seem that this would be so, from the Canon Law, c. excommunicamus
       and c. ad abolendam. Therefore the Notary must take great care to set it down whether such
       a person has made his abjuration as one under a light or a strong suspicion of heresy; for, as
       we have often said, there is a great difference between these. And when this has been done,
       sentence or penance shall be pronounced in the following manner:
             We., N., Bishop of such city or Judge in the territories of such Prince, having diligently
       in mind that you, N., of such a place in such a Diocese, have been accused before us of such
       heresy (naming it); and wishing to inquire judicially whether you have fallen into the said
       heresy, by examining witnesses, by summoning and questioning you upon oath, and by all
       convenient means in our power, we have acted and proceeded as it behoved.
             Having digested, observed and diligently inspected all the facts, and having discussed
       the merits of the process of this case, examining al and singular which has been done and
       said, and having consulted with and obtained the mature opinion of many learned
       Theologians and lawyers, we find that you have been in such place or places publicly
       defamed by good and sober men for the said heresy; wherefore, as we are bidden by the
       canonical institutions, we have imposed upon you a canonical purgation by which you and
       your sponsors have here publicly purged yourself before us. We find also that you have
       committed such and such (naming them), by reason of which we have just cause t hold you
       strongly or lightly (let it be said whether it is one or the other) suspected of the said heresy;
       and therefore we have caused you to abjure heresy as one under such suspicion (here, if he
       has abjured as one under strong suspicion, let them say “all heresy”; and if as one under
       light suspicion, “the said heresy”).
             But because we cannot and must not in any way tolerate that which you have done, but
       are in justice compelled to abominate it, that you may become more careful in the future,
       and that your crimes may not remain unpunished, and that others may not be encouraged to
       fall into the like sins, and that the injuries to the Creator may not easily be passed over:
       Therefore against you, N., having so purged yourself and abjured, standing personally in our
       presence in this place at the time which was assigned to you, We, the aforesaid Bishop or
       Judge, sitting in tribunal as Judges judging, having before us the Holy Gospels that our
       judgement may proceed as from the countenance of God and our eyes see with equity,
       pronounce sentence or penance in the following manner, namely, that you must, etc.
             And let them pronounce sentence as shall seem most to the honour of the faith and the
       extermination of the sin of heresy: as that on certain Sundays and Festivals he must stand at
       the door of such a church, holding a candle of such a weight, during the solemnization of
       Holy Mass, with head uncovered and bare feet, and offer the said candle at the altar; and that
       he must fast on Fridays, and that for a certain period he must not dare to depart from that
       place, but present himself before the Bishop or Judge on certain days of the week; and any
       similar penance which seemed to be demanded by the particular nature of his guilt; for it is
       impossible to give a hard-and-fast rule. This sentence was given, etc. And let it be put into
       execution after it has been pronounced; and it can be cancelled, mitigated or changed as may

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_26a.html (2 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:16 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXVI

       be required by the condition of the penitent and for his correction and humiliation; for the
       Bishop has this power by law.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                          Question XXVII

                                                        Main Index


                                                 Part III, Third Head, Question XXVI
                                                  was transcribed by Christie Rice.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_26a.html (3 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:16 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXVII


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                       PART III, THIRD HEAD, QUESTION XXVII.
    The Method of passing Sentence upon one who hath Confessed to Heresy, but is still not Penitent

             The eighth method of terminating a process on behalf of the faith is used when the
       person accused of heresy, after a careful examination of the merits of the process in
       consultation with learned lawyers, is found to have confessed his heresy, but to be penitent,
       and not truly to have relapsed into heresy. And this is when the accused has himself
       confessed in a Court of law under oath before the Bishop and Inquisitor that he has for so
       long lived and persisted in that heresy of which he is accused, or in any other, and has
       believed in and adhered to it; but that afterwards, being persuaded by the Bishop and others,
       he wishes to be converted and to return to the bosom of the Church, and to abjure that and
       every heresy, and to make such satisfaction as they require of him; and it is found that he
       has made no previous abjuration of any other heresy, but is now willing and prepared to
       abjure.
             In such a case the procedure will be as follows. Although such a person has for many
       years persisted in the said heresy and even in others, and has believed and practised them
       and led many others into error; yet if at last he has consented to abjure those heresies and to
       make such satisfaction as the Bishop and the ecclesiastical Judge shall decree, he is not to be
       delivered up to the secular Court to suffer the extreme penalty; nor, if he is a cleric, is he to
       be degraded. But he is to admitted to mercy, according to the Canon ad abolendam. And
       after he has abjured his former heresy he is to be confined in prison for life (see the Canon
       excommunicamus, where it provides for the absolution of such). But great care must be
       taken that he has no simulated a false penitence in order to be received back into the Church.
       Also the secular Court is not at all bound by such a sentence as the above.
             He shall make his abjuration in the manner already set out, with this difference. He
       shall with his own mouth confess his crimes before the congregation in church on a Feast
       Day, in the following manner. The clerk shall ask him, have you for so many years persisted
       in the heresy of witches? And he shall answer, Yes. And then, Have you done this and this
       to which you have confessed? And he shall answer, Yes. And so on. And finally he shall
       make his abjuration kneeling on his knees. And since, having been convicted of heresy, he
       has been excommunicated, after he has by abjuration returned to the bosom of the Church,
       he is to be granted the grace of absolution, according to the manner used by the Bishops
       with Apostolic authority of absolving from the major excommunication. And sentence shall
       at once be pronounced in the following manner:
             We, the Bishop of such city, or the Judge in the territories of such Prince, seeing that
       you, N., of such a place in such a Diocese, have been by public report and the information of
       credible persons accused before us of the sin of heresy; and since you had for many years
       been infected with that heresy to the great damage of your soul; and because this accusation
       against you has keenly wounded our hearts: we whose duty it is by reason of the office

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_27a.html (1 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:16 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXVII

       which we have received to plant the Holy Catholic Faith in the hearts of men and to keep
       away all heresy from their minds, wishing to be more certainly informed whether there was
       any truth in the report which had come to our ears, in order that, if it were true, we might
       provide a healthy and fitting remedy, proceeded in the best way which was open to us to
       question and examine witness and to interrogate you on oath concerning that of which you
       were accused, doing all and singular which was required of us by justice and the canonical
       sanctions.
             And since we wished to bring your case to a suitable conclusion, and to have a clear
       understanding of your past state of mind, whether you were walking in the darkness or in the
       light, and whether or not you had fallen into the sin of heresy; having conducted the whole
       process, we summoned together in council before us learned men of the Theological faculty
       and men skilled in both the Canon and the Civil Law, knowing that, according to canonical
       institution, the judgement is sound which is confirmed by the opinion of many; and having
       on all details consulted the opinion of the said learned men, and having diligently and
       carefully examined all the circumstances of the process; we find that you are, by your own
       confession made on oath before us in the Court, convicted of many of the sins of witches.
       (Let them be expressed in detail.)
             But since the Lord in His infinite mercy permits men at times to fall into heresies and
       errors, not only that learned Catholics may be exercised in sacred arguments, but that they
       who have fallen from the faith may become more humble thereafter and perform works of
       penitence: having carefully discussed the circumstances of this same process, we find that
       you, at our frequent instance and following the advice of us and other honest men, have with
       a healthy mind returned to the unity and bosom of the Holy Mother Church, detesting the
       said errors and heresies, and acknowledging the irrefragable truth of the Holy Catholic
       Faith, laying it t your inmost heart: wherefore, following in His footsteps Who wishes that
       no one should perish, we have admitted you to this adjuration and public abjuration of the
       said an all other heresies. And having done this, we absolve you from the sentence of major
       excommunication by which you were bound for your fall into heresy, and reconciling you to
       the Holy Mother Church we restore you to the sacraments of the Church; provided that with
       a true heart, and not with simulated faith, you return to the unity of the Church, as we
       believe and hope that you have done.
             But because it would be a very scandalous thing to avenge the injuries done to temporal
       Lords and to tolerate the offences committed against God the Creator of all the Heavens,
       since it is a far greater sin to offend against the Eternal than against a temporal Majesty, and
       that God Who pities sinners may have mercy upon you, that you may be an example for
       others, and that your sins may not remain unpunished, and that you may become more
       careful in the future, and not more prone but less apt to commit the said and any other
       crimes: We the said Bishop and Judge, or Judges, on behalf of the faith, sitting in tribunal as
       Judges judging, etc., as above . . . that you put on a grey-blue garment, etc. Also we
       sentence and condemn you to perpetual imprisonment, there to be punished with the bread
       of affliction and the water of distress; reserving to ourselves the right to mitigate, aggravate,
       change, or remit wholly or in part the said sentence if, when, and as often as it shall seem
       good to us to do so. This sentence was given, etc.
             After this the Judge shall proceed point by point, pronouncing sentence in the
       following or some similar manner:


file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_27a.html (2 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:16 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXVII

            My son, your sentence or penance consists in this, that you bear this cross during the
       whole period of your life, that you stand so bearing it on the altar steps or in the door of such
       churches, and that you be imprisoned for life on bread and water. But, my son, lest this may
       seem too hard for you, I assure you that if you patiently bear your punishment you will find
       mercy with us; therefore doubt not nor despair, but hope strongly.
            After this, let the sentence be duly executed, and let him put on the said garment and be
       placed on high upon the altar steps in full view of the people as they go out, surrounded by
       the officers of the secular Court. And at the dinner hour let him be led by the officers to
       prison, and the rest of the sentence be carried out and duly performed. And after he is led
       out through the door of the church, let the ecclesiastical Judge have no more to do with the
       matter; and if the secular Court be satisfied, it is well, but if not, let it do its pleasure.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                           Question XVIII

                                                        Main Index


                                                 Part III, Third Head, Question XXVII
                                                  was transcribed by Christie Rice.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_27a.html (3 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:16 PM]
Notes

           “Distress.” “III. Kings” (A.V., "I. Kings") xxii, 27: Put this man in prison and feed him
        with bread of affliction, and water of distress.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/notes/n3023.html [2002-01-20 12:04:16 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXVIII


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                        PART III, THIRD HEAD, QUESTION XVIII.
 The Method of passing Sentence upon one who hath Confessed to Heresy but is Relapsed, Albeit now
                                            Penitent

             THE ninth method of arriving at a conclusive sentence in a process on behalf of the
       faith is used when the person accused of heresy, after a careful investigation of the
       circumstances of the process in consultation with men of good judgement, is found to have
       confessed her heresy and to be penitent, but that she has truly relapsed. And this is when the
       accused herself confesses in Court before the Bishop or Judges that she has at another time
       abjured all heresy, and this is legally proved, and that she has afterwards fallen into such a
       heresy or error: or that she has abjured some particular heresy, such as that of witches, and
       has afterwards returned to it; but that following better advice she is penitent, and believes
       the Catholic faith, and returns to the unity of the Church. Such a one is not, if she humbly
       ask for them, to be denied the sacraments of Penance and the Eucharist; but however much
       she may repent, she is nevertheless to be delivered up as a backslider to the secular Court to
       suffer the extreme penalty. But it must be understood that this refers to one who had made
       her abjuration as one manifestly taken in heresy, or as one strongly suspected of heresy, and
       not to one who has so done as being under only a light suspicion.
             The following procedure must be observed in this case. When, after mature and careful
       and, if necessary, repeated investigation by learned men, it has been concluded that the said
       prisoner has actually and prepense relapsed into heresy, the Bishop or Judge shall send to
       the said prisoner in the place of detention two or three honest men, especially religious or
       clerics, who are zealous for the faith, of whom the prisoner has no suspicion, but rather
       places confidence in them; and they shall go in to her at a suitable time and speak to her
       sweetly of the contempt of this world and the miseries of this life, and of the joys and glory
       of Paradise. And leading up from this, they shall indicate to her on the part of the Bishop or
       Judge that she cannot escape temporal death, and that she should therefore take care for the
       safety of her soul, and prepare herself to confess her sins and receive the Sacrament of the
       Eucharist. And they shall visit her often, persuading her to penitence and patience,
       strengthening her as much as they can in the Catholic truth, and they shall diligently cause
       her to confess, so that she may receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist at her humble
       petition. For these Sacraments are not to be denied to such offenders.
             And when she has received these Sacraments, and been well disposed by these men to
       salvation; after two or three days during which they have strengthened her in the Catholic
       faith and induced her to repentance, the Bishop or Judge of that place shall notify the bailiff
       of the place or the authorities of the secular Court, that on such a day at such an hour (not a
       Feast Day) he should be with his attendants in such a square or place (but it must be outside
       a church) to receive from their Court a certain backslider whom the Bishop and Judge will
       hand over to him.

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_28a.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:04:17 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXVIII

             And on the morning of the day fixed, or on the day before, it shall be publicly
       proclaimed throughout the city of place in those towns and villages where such
       proclamations are customary, that on such a day at such an hour in such a place there will be
       a sermon preached in defence of the Faith, and that the Bishop and other Judges will
       condemn a certain person who has relapsed into the sin of heresy, delivering her up to
       secular justice.
             But here it must be considered that, if he who has so relapsed should have been
       ordained in any Holy Orders, or should be a priest or a religious of any Order, before he is
       handed over he is to be degraded and stripped of the privileges of his ecclesiastic order. And
       so, when he has been degraded from all ecclesiastical office, let him be handed over to
       secular justice to receive his due punishment.
             When, therefore, such a one is to be degraded from his orders and handed over to the
       secular Court, let the Bishop summon together all the prelates and religious men of his
       Diocese. For in this case, though not in others, only the Bishop together with the other
       prelates and religious and learned men of his diocese can degrade one who has received
       Holy Orders when he is to be delivered to the secular Court, or is to be imprisoned for life
       for the sin of heresy.
             On the day appointed for the degrading of the backslider and the handing of him over
       to the secular Court, if he be a cleric, or, if he be a layman, for leaving him to hear his
       definitive sentence, the people shall gather together in some square or open place outside the
       church, and the Inquisitor shall preach a sermon, and the prisoner shall be set on a high
       place in the presence of the secular authorities. And if the prisoner be a cleric who is to be
       degraded, the Bishop shall don his Pontifical robes, together with the other prelates of his
       Diocese in their vestments and copes, and the prisoner shall be clothed and robed as if he
       were to minister his office; and the Bishop shall degrade him from his order, beginning from
       the higher and proceeding to the lowest. And just as in conferring Holy Orders the Bishop
       uses the words ordained by the Church, so in degrading him he shall take off his chasuble
       and stole, and so with the other vestments, using words of a directly opposite meaning.
             When this degradation has been accomplished, the proceedings must continue in the
       legal and accustomed manner, and the Notary or religious or clerk shall be bidden to read
       the sentence, which shall be after the following manner, whether the prisoner be a layman or
       a degraded cleric:
             We, N., by the mercy of the God Bishop of such city, and Judge in the territories of
       such Prince, seeing that we are legitimately informed that you, N., of such a place in such a
       Diocese, have been before us (or before such Bishop and Judges) accused of such heresy or
       heresies (naming them), of which you were lawfully convicted by your own confession and
       by witnesses, and that you had obstinately persisted in them for so long, but afterwards,
       listening to better advice, publicly in such a place abjured, renounced and revoked those
       heresies in the form provided by the Church, on which account the said Bishop and
       Inquisitor, believing that you had truly returned to the bosom of the Holy Church of God,
       did absolve you from the sentence of excommunication by which you were bound, enjoining
       upon you a salutary penance if with true heart and faith unfeigned you had returned to the
       unity of the Holy Church; but whereas after all the aforesaid and the lapse of so many years
       you are again accused before us and have again fallen into such heresies which you had
       abjured (naming them), and though it was sore grief to us to hear such things of you, yet we
       were by justice compelled to investigate the matter, to examine the witnesses, and to

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_28a.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:04:17 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXVIII

       summon and question you on oath, proceeding in each and every way as we are bidden by
       the canonical institutions.
             And since we wished to conclude this case without any doubt, we convened in solemn
       council learned men of the Theological faculty and men skilled in the Canon and the Civil
       Law, and in consultation with them maturely and carefully examined all and singular which
       had been done, said and seen in the process and diligently discussed each circumstance,
       weighing all equally in the balance as it behoved us; and we find both by the legitimate
       evidence of witnesses and by your own confession received in Court that you have fallen
       into the heresies which you had abjured. For we find that you have said or done such and
       such (let all be named), on account of which, with the concurrence of the said learned men,
       we have judged and now judge that you are a backslider, according tot he canonical
       institutions, to which we refer in grief and grieve to refer.
             But since it has come to the knowledge of Us and of many honest Catholic men that, by
       the inspiration of Divine grade, you have once more returned to the bosom of the Church
       and to the truth of the faith detesting the aforesaid errors and heresies and with true
       orthodoxy unfeigned believing and protesting the Catholic faith, we have admitted you to
       receive the Church's Sacraments of Penance and the Holy Eucharist at your humble request.
       But since the Church of God has no more which it can do in respect of you, seeing that it has
       acted so mercifully towards you in the manner we have said, and you have abused that
       mercy by falling back into the heresies which you had abjured: therefore We the said Bishop
       and Judges, sitting in tribunal as Judges judging, having before us the Holy Gospels that our
       judgement may proceed as from the countenance of God and our eyes see with equity, and
       having before our eyes only God and the irrefragable truth of the Holy Faith and the
       extirpation of the plague of heresy; against you, N., in this place on the day and at the hour
       before assigned to you for the hearing of your definitive sentence, we pronounce in sentence
       that you have truly fallen back into the sin of heresy, although you are penitent; and as one
       truly so relapsed we cast you forth from this our ecclesiastical Court, and leave you to be
       delivered to the secular arm. But we earnestly pray that the said secular Court may temper
       its justice with mercy, and that there be no bloodshed or danger of death.
             And here the Bishop and his assessors shall withdraw, and the secular Court shall
       perform its office.
             It is to be noted that, although the Bishop and Inquisitor ought to use their utmost
       diligence, both by their own efforts and those of others, to induce the prisoner to repent and
       return to the Catholic faith; yet, after he has repented and it has been decided in council that,
       though he is penitent, he is nevertheless truly a backslider and as such to be handed over in
       person to the secular Court, they ought not to inform him of such sentence and punishment.
       therefore from that time, neither before nor after the sentence should they present
       themselves before him, that he be not moved in his spirit against them, a thing which is very
       carefully to be avoided in death of this sort. But, as we have said, let them send to him some
       honest men, especially those in religious orders, or clerics, in whom he has confidence; and
       let them inform him of the sentence to come and of his death, and strengthen him in the
       faith, exhorting him to have patience; and let them visit him after the sentence, and console
       him and pray with him, and not leave him until he has rendered his spirit to his Creator.
             Let them, therefore, beware and be on their guard not to do or say anything which may
       enable the prisoner to anticipate his death, or place themselves in an irregular position. And,
       as they have burdened themselves with the care of his soul, let them then share also in his

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_28a.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:04:17 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXVIII

       punishment and guilt.
            It must also be remarked that such a sentence which delivers up a person to the secular
       Court ought not to be pronounced on a Festival or Solemn Day, nor in a church, but outside
       in some open space. For it is a sentence which leads to death; and it is more decent that it
       should be delivered on an ordinary day and outside the church; for a Feast Day and the
       church are dedicated to God.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                          Question XXIX

                                                        Main Index


                                                Part III, Third Head, Question XXVIII
                                                 was transcribed by Christie Rice.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_28a.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:04:17 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXIX


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                      PART III, THIRD HEAD, QUESTION XXIX.
The Method of passing Sentence upon one who hath Confessed to Heresy but is Impenitent, although not
                                            Relapsed

             THE tenth method of completing a process on behalf of the Faith by a final sentence is
       used when the person accused of heresy, after a careful examination of the circumstances of
       the process in consultation with skilled lawyers, is found to have confessed his heresy and to
       be impenitent, though he has not relapsed into the heresy. Such a case is very rarely found,
       but yet it has come within the experience of us Inquisitors. In such a case, therefore, the
       Bishop and Judge must not be in haste to sentence the prisoner, but must keep him well
       guarded and fettered, and induce him to be converted, even to the extent of several months,
       showing him that, by remaining impenitent, he will be damned in body and soul.
             But if neither by comforts nor hardships, nor by threatening nor persuasion, can he be
       brought to renounce his errors, and the appointed period of grace has expired, let the Bishop
       and Judges prepare to deliver or abandon him to the secular Court; and they shall give notice
       to the herald or bailiff or secular authorities that on such a day, not a Feast, and at such an
       hour they should be in such a place with their attendants outside a church, and that they will
       deliver to them a certain impenitent heretic. None the less they shall themselves make public
       proclamation in the customary places that on such a day at such a time in the aforesaid place
       a sermon will be preached in defence of the faith, and that they will hand over a certain
       heretic to secular justice; and that all should come and be present, being granted the
       customary Indulgences.
             After this, the prisoner shall be delivered to the secular Court in the following manner.
       But let him first be often admonished to renounce his heresy and repent; but if he altogether
       refuses, let the sentence be pronounced.
             We, N., by the mercy of God Bishop of such a city, or Judge in the territories of such
       Prince, seeing that you, N., of such a place in such a Diocese, have been accused before us
       by public report and the information of credible persons (naming them) of heresy, and that
       you have for many years persisted in those heresies to the great hurt of your immortal soul;
       and since we, whose duty it is to exterminate the plague of heresy, wishing to be more
       certainly informed of this matter and to see whether you walked in darkness or the light,
       have diligently inquired into the said accusation, summoning and duly examining you, we
       find that you are indeed infected with the said heresy.
             But since it is the chief desire of our hearts to plant the Holy Catholic Faith in the
       hearts of our people, and to eradicate the pest of heresy, we have used diverse and various
       suitable methods, both by ourselves and by others, to persuade you to renounce your said
       errors and heresies in which you had stood, were standing, and even now defiantly and
       obstinately stand with stubborn heart. But since the Enemy of the human race is present in
       your heart, wrapping you up and entangling you in the said errors, and you have refused and

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_29a.html (1 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:04:17 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXIX

       yet refuse to abjure the said heresies, choosing rather the death of your soul in hell and of
       your body in this world than to renounce the said heresies and return to the bosom of the
       Church and cleanse your soul, and since you are determined to remain in your sin:
             Therefore inasmuch as you are bound by the chain of excommunication from the Holy
       Church, and are justly cut off from the number of the Lord's flock, and are deprived of the
       benefits of the Church, the Church can do no more for you, having done all that was
       possible. We the said Bishop and Judges on behalf of the Faith, sitting in tribunal as Judges
       judging, and having before us the Holy Gospels that our judgement may proceed as from the
       countenance of god and our eyes see with equity, and having before our eyes only God and
       the truth of the Holy Faith and the extirpation of the plague of heresy, on this day and at this
       hour and place assigned to you for the hearing of your final sentence, we give it as our
       judgement and sentence that you are indeed an impenitent heretic, and as truly such to be
       delivered and abandoned to the secular Court: wherefore by this sentence we cast you away
       as an impenitent heretic from our ecclesiastical Court, and deliver or abandon you to the
       power of the secular Court: praying the said Court to moderate or temper its sentence of
       death against you. This sentence was given, etc.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                           Question XXX

                                                        Main Index


                                                 Part III, Third Head, Question XXIX
                                                  was transcribed by Christie Rice.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_29a.html (2 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:04:17 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXX


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                       PART III, THIRD HEAD, QUESTION XXX.
                    Of One who has Confessed to Heresy, is Relapsed, and is also Impenitent

             THE eleventh method of concluding and terminating a process on behalf of the Faith is
       used when the person accused of heresy, after a diligent discussion of the circumstances of
       the process in consultation with learned men, is found to have confessed her heresy, and to
       be impenitent, and to have relapsed into it. And this is when the accused confesses with her
       own mouth in Court that she believes and has practiced such and such. The procedure in this
       case is the same as that above; and because she is manifestly a heretic, sentence shall be
       pronounced in the following manner in the presence of the Bishop and Judges:
             We N., by the mercy of God Bishop of such city, or Judge in the territories of such
       Prince, seeing that you N., of such a place in such a Diocese, were formerly accused before
       us (or before such and such, our predecessors) of the crime of heresy (naming them), and
       that you were legally convicted of that crime by your own confession and the testimony of
       worthy men, and that you obstinately persisted in it for so many years; but that afterwards,
       having listened to better advice, you publicly abjured those heresies in such a place and in
       the form required by the Church, on which account the aforesaid Bishop and Judge,
       believing that you had truly renounced the said errors and had returned with Catholic faith to
       the bosom of the Church, granted you the benefit of absolution, releasing you from the
       sentence of excommunication by which you were formerly bound, and, setting you a
       salutary penance if with true heart and faith unfeigned you remained converted to the unity
       of the Holy Church, received you back in mercy. For the Holy Church of God is not closed
       to such as return to her bosom.
             But after all the aforesaid you have to our great grief been accused before us of having
       again fallen into those damnable heresies which you formerly abjured in public; yea, you
       have done so and so (naming them) in contravention of the said abjuration and to the
       damage of your soul; and although we are sore wounded and cut to the heart to have heard
       such things of you, yet we were in justice compelled to inquire into the matter, to examine
       the witnesses, and to summon and question you on oath as it behoved us, and in every
       particular to proceed as we are bidden by the canonical institutions. And as we wished to
       conclude this case beyond any doubt, we summoned a solemn council of men learned in the
       Theological faculty and of those skilled in the Canon and Civil Laws.
             And having obtained the mature and considered judgement of the said learned men
       upon every single particular which had been brought to notice and done in this case, after
       repeated examination of the whole process and careful and diligent discussion of every
       circumstance, as law and justice demanded, we find that you are legally convicted both by
       the evidence of credible witnesses and by your own repeated confession, that you have
       fallen, and fallen again, into the heresies which you abjured. For we find that you have said
       or done such and such (naming them), wherefore we have reason, in the opinion of the said

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_30a.html (1 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:04:18 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXX

       learned men, and compelled thereto by your own excesses, to judge you as a backslider
       according to the canonical decrees. And that we say this with grief, and grieve to say it, He
       knows from Whom nothing is hid and Who seeth into the secrets of all hearts. And with all
       our hearts we desired and still desire to lead you back to the unity of the Holy Church and to
       drive out from your heart the said foul heresy, that so you may save your soul and preserve
       your body and soul from the destruction in hell, and we have exerted our utmost endeavor
       by various fitting methods to convert to salvation; but you have been given up to your sin
       and led away and seduced by an evil spirit, and have chosen to be tortured with fearful and
       eternal torment in hell, and that your temporal body should here be consumed in the flames,
       rather than to give ear to better counsels and renounce your damnable and pestilent errors,
       and to return to the merciful bosom of our Holy Mother Church.
             Wherefore since the Church of God can do nothing more for you, having done all that
       was possible to convert you: We the Bishop and Judges named in this cause on behalf of the
       faith, sitting in tribunal as Judges judging, having before us the Holy Gospels that our
       judgement may proceed as from the countenance of God and our eyes see with equity, and
       having before our eyes only God and the honour of the Holy Catholic Faith, on this day at
       this hour and place before assigned to you for the hearing of your final sentence, we
       pronounce judgement upon you N., here present before us, and condemn and sentence you
       as a truly impenitent and relapsed heretic, and as such to be delivered or abandoned to
       secular justice; and by this our definitive sentence we cast you out as a truly impenitent and
       relapsed heretic from our ecclesiastical Court, and deliver and abandon you to the power of
       the secular Court; praying that the said secular Court will temper or moderate its sentence of
       death against you. This sentence was give, etc.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                          Question XXXI

                                                        Main Index


                                                  Part III, Third Head, Question XXX
                                                   was transcribed by Christie Rice.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_30a.html (2 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:04:18 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXXI


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                      PART III, THIRD HEAD, QUESTION XXXI.
                                  Of One Taken and Convicted, but Denying Everything

             THE twelfth method of finishing and concluding a process on behalf of the faith is used
       when the person accused of heresy, after a diligent examination of the merits of the process
       in consultation with skilled lawyers, is found to be convicted of heresy by the evidence of
       the facts or by the legitimate production of witnesses, but not by his own confession. That is
       to say, he may be convicted by the evidence of the facts, in that he has publicly practiced
       heresy; or by the evidence of witnesses against whom he can take no legitimate exception;
       yet, though so taken and convicted, he firmly and constantly denies the charge. See Henry of
       Segusio On Heresy, question 34.
             The procedure in such a case is as follows. The accused must be kept in strong durance
       fettered and chained, and must often be visited by the officers, both in a body and severally,
       who will use their own best endeavours and those of others to induce him to discover the
       truth; telling him that if he refuses and persists in his denial, he will in the end be abandoned
       to the secular law, and will not be able to escape temporal death.
             But if he continues for a long time in his denials, the Bishop and his officers, now in a
       body and now severally, now personally and now with the assistance of other honest and
       upright men, shall summon before them now one witness, now another, and warm him to
       attend strictly to what he has deposed, and to be sure whether or not he has told the truth;
       that he should beware lest in damning another temporally he damn himself eternally; that if
       he be afraid, let him at least tell them the truth in secret, that the accused should not die
       unjustly. And let them be careful to talk to him in such a way that they may see clearly
       whether or not his depositions have been true.
             But if the witnesses, after this warning, adhere to their statements, and the accused
       maintains his denials, let not the Bishop and his officers on that account be in any haste to
       pronounce a definitive sentence and hand the prisoners over to secular law; but let them
       detain him still longer, now persuading him to confess, now yet again urging the witnesses
       (but one at a time) to examine their consciences as well. And let the Bishop and his officers
       pay particular attention to that witness who seems to be of the best conscience and the most
       disposed to good, and let them more insistently charge him on his conscience to speak the
       truth whether or not the matter was as he had deposed. And if they see any witness vacillate,
       or there are any other indications that he has given false evidence, let them attest him
       according to the counsel of learned men, and proceed as justice shall require.
             For it is very often found that after a person so convicted by credible witnesses has
       long persisted in his denials, he has at length relented, especially on being truly informed
       that he will not be delivered to the secular Court, but be admitted to mercy if he confesses
       his sin, and he has then freely confessed the truth which he had so long denied. And it is
       often found that the witnesses, actuated by malice and overcome by enmity, have conspired

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_31a.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:04:18 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXXI

       together to accuse an innocent person of the sin of heresy; but afterwards, at the frequent
       entreaty of the Bishop and his officers, their consciences have been stricken with remorse
       and, by Divine inspiration, they have revoked their evidence and confessed that they have
       out of malice put that crime upon the accused. Therefore the prisoner in such a case is not to
       be sentenced hastily, but must be kept for a year or more before he is delivered up to the
       secular Court.
             When a sufficient time has elapsed, and after all possible care has been taken, if the
       accused who has been thus legally convicted has acknowledged his guilt and confessed in
       legal from that he hath been for the period stated ensnared in the crime of heresy, and has
       consented to abjure that and every heresy, and to perform such satisfaction as shall seem
       proper to the Bishop and Inquisitor for one convicted of heresy both by his own confession
       and the legitimate production of witnesses; then let him as a penitent heretic publicly abjure
       all heresy, in the manner which we have set down in the eighth method of concluding a
       process on behalf of the faith.
             But if he has confessed that he hath fallen into such heresy, but nevertheless obstinately
       adheres to it, he must be delivered to the secular Court as an impenitent, after the manner of
       the tenth method which we have explained above.
             But if the accused has remained firm and unmoved in his denial of the charges against
       him, but the witnesses have withdrawn their charges, revoking their evidence and
       acknowledging their guilt, confessing that they had put so great a crime upon an innocent
       man from motives of rancour and hatred, or had been suborned or bribed thereto; then the
       accused shall be freely discharged, but they shall be punished as false witnesses, accusers or
       informers. This made clear by Paul of Burgos in his comment on the Canon c. multorum.
       And sentence or penance shall be pronounced against them as shall seem proper to the
       Bishop and Judges; but in any case such false witnesses must be condemned to perpetual
       imprisonment on a diet of bread and water, and to do penance for all the days of their life,
       being made to stand upon the steps before the church door, etc. However, the Bishops have
       power to mitigate or even to increase the sentence after a year or some other period, in the
       usual manner.
             But if the accused, after a year or other longer period which has been deemed
       sufficient, continues to maintain his denials, and the legitimate witnesses abide by their
       evidence, the Bishop and Judges shall prepare to abandon him to the secular Court; sending
       to him certain honest men zealous for the faith, especially religious, to tell him that he
       cannot escape temporal death while he thus persists in his denial, but will be delivered up as
       an impenitent heretic to the power of the secular Court. And the Bishop and his officers
       shall give notice to the Bailiff or authority of the secular Court that on such a day at such an
       hour and in such a place (not inside a church) he should come with his attendants to receive
       an impenitent heretic whom they will deliver to him. And let him make public proclamation
       in the usual places that all should be present on such a day at such an hour and place to hear
       a sermon preached on behalf of the faith, and that the Bishop and his officer will hand over a
       certain obstinate heretic to the secular Court.
             On the appointed day for the pronouncement of sentence the Bishop and his officer
       shall be in the place aforesaid, and the prisoner shall be placed on high before the assembled
       clergy and people so that he may be seen by all, and the secular authorities shall be present
       before the prisoner. Then sentence shall be pronounced in the following manner:
             We, N., by the mercy of God Bishop of such city, or Judge in the territories of such

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_31a.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:04:18 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXXI

       Prince, seeing that you, N., of such a place in such a Diocese, have been accused before us
       of such heresy (naming it); and wishing to be more certainly informed whether the charges
       made against you were true, and whether you walked in darkness or in the light; we
       proceeded to inform ourselves by diligently examining the witnesses, by often summoning
       and questioning you on oath, and admitting an Advocate to plead in your defence, and by
       proceeding in every way as we were bound by the canonical decrees.
             And wishing to conclude your trial in a manner beyond all doubt, we convened in
       solemn council men learned in the Theological faculty and in the Canon and Civil Laws.
       And having diligently examined and discussed each circumstance of the process and
       maturely and carefully considered with the said learned men everything which has been said
       and done in this present case, we find that you, N., have been legally convicted of having
       been infected with the sin of heresy for so long a time, and that you have said an done such
       and such (naming them) on account of which it manifestly appears that you are legitimately
       convicted of the said heresy.
             But since we desired, and still desire, that you should confess the truth and renounce
       the said heresy, and be led back to the bosom of Holy Church and to the unity of the Holy
       Faith, that so you should save your soul and escape the destruction of both your body and
       soul in hell; we have by our own efforts and those of others, and by delaying your sentence
       for a long time, tried to induce you to repent; but you being obstinately given over to
       wickedness have scorned to agree to our wholesome advice, and have persisted and do
       persist with stubborn and defiant mind in your contumacious and dogged denials; and this
       we say with grief, and grieve and mourn in saying it. But since the Church of God has
       waited so long for you to repent and acknowledge your guilt, and you have refused and still
       refuse, her grace and mercy can go no farther.
             Wherefore that you may be an example to others and that they may be kept from all
       such heresies, and that such crimes may not remain unpunished: We the Bishop and Judges
       named on behalf of the faith, sitting in tribunal as Judges judging, and having before us the
       Holy Gospels that our judgement may proceed as from the countenance of God and our eyes
       see with equity, and having before our eyes only God and the glory and honour of the Holy
       Faith, we judge, declare and pronounce sentence that you standing here in our presence on
       this day at the hour and place appointed for the hearing of your final sentence, are an
       impenitent heretic, and as such to be delivered or abandoned to secular justice; and as an
       obstinate and impenitent heretic we have by this sentence cast you off from the
       ecclesiastical Court and deliver and abandon you to secular justice and the power of the
       secular Court. And we pray that the said secular Court may moderate its sentence of death
       upon you. this sentence was given, etc.
             The Bishop and Judges may, moreover, arrange that just men zealous for the faith,
       known to and in the confidence of the secular Court, shall have access to the prisoner while
       the secular Court is performing its office, in order to console him and even yet induce him to
       confess the truth, acknowledge his guilt, and renounce his errors.
             But if it should happen that after the sentence, and when the prisoner is already at the
       place where he is to be burned, he should say that he wishes to confess the truth and
       acknowledge his guilt, and does so; and if he should be willing to abjure that and every
       heresy; although it may be presumed that he does this rather from fear of death than for love
       of the truth, yet I should be of the opinion that he may in mercy be received as a penitent
       heretic and be imprisoned for life. See the gloss on the chapters ad abolendam and

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_31a.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:04:18 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXXI

       excommunicamus. Nevertheless, according to the rigour of the law, the Judges ought not to
       place much faith in a conversion of this sort; and furthermore, they can always punish him
       on account of the temporal injuries which he has committed.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                          Question XXXII

                                                        Main Index


                                                 Part III, Third Head, Question XXXI
                                                  was transcribed by Christie Rice.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_31a.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:04:18 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXXII


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                       PART III, THIRD HEAD, QUESTION XXXII.
            Of One who is Convicted but who hath Fled or who Contumaciously Absents himself

            THE Thirteenth and last method of arriving at a definite sentence in a process on behalf
       of the Faith is used when the person accused of heresy, after a diligent discussion of the
       merits of the process in consultation with learned lawyers, is found to be convicted of
       heresy, but has made his escape, or defiantly absents himself after the expiration of a set
       time. And this happens in three cases.
            First, when the accused is convicted of heresy by his own confession, or by the
       evidence of the facts, or by the legitimate production of witnesses, but has fled, or has
       absented himself and refused to appear after being legally summoned.
            Secondly, when a person has been accused and certain information has been laid
       against him on account of which he rests under some suspicion, even if it be only a light
       one, and he has been summoned to answer for his faith; and because he has defiantly refused
       to appear, he is excommunicated, and has stubbornly remained in that excommunication for
       a year, and always defiantly absents himself.
            The third case is when someone directly obstructs the Bishop's or Judge's sentence or
       process on behalf of the Faith, or lends his help, advice or protection for that purpose, and
       such a person has been stricken with the sword of excommunication. And if he was
       obstinately endured that excommunication for a year, he is then to be condemned as a
       heretic who has defied the administration of justice.
            In the first case, such a person is, according to the Canon ad abolendam, to be
       condemned as an impenitent heretic. In the second and third cases he is not to be judged as
       an impenitent heretic, but to be condemned as if he were a penitent heretic. And in any of
       these cases the following procedure should be observed. When such a person has been
       awaited for sufficient time, let him be summoned by the Bishop and his officer in the
       Cathedral Church of that Diocese in which he has sinned, and in the other churches of that
       place where he had his dwelling, and especially from where he has fled; and let him be
       summoned in the following manner:
            We, N., by the mercy of God Bishop of such Diocese, having in our charge the welfare
       of souls, and having above all the desires of our heart this most earnest desire that in our
       time in the said Diocese the Church should flourish and that there should be a fruitful and
       abundant harvest in that vineyard of the Lord of Hosts, which the right hand of the Most
       High Father has planted in the bosom of the righteous, which the Son of that Father has
       plentifully watered with His own life-giving Blood, which the reviving Spirit the Paraclete
       has made fruitful within by His wonderful and ineffable gifts, which the whole
       incomprehensible and ineffable Blessed Trinity has endowed and enriched with many very
       great and holy privileges; but the wild boar out of the forest, by which is meant any sort of
       heretic, has devoured and despoiled it, laying waste the fair fruit of the faith and planting

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_32a.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:04:19 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXXII

       thorny briars among the vines; and that tortuous serpent, the evil enemy of our human race,
       who is Satan and the devil, has breathed out venom and poisoned the fruit of the vineyard
       with the plague of heresy: And this is the field of the Lord, the Catholic Church, to till and
       cultivate which the only first-born Son of God the Father descended from the heights of
       Heaven, and sowed it with miracles and Holy discourse, going through towns and villages
       and teaching not without great labour; and He chose as His Apostles honest labouring men,
       and showed them the way, endowing them with eternal rewards; and the Son of God
       Himself expects to gather from that field on the Day of the Last Judgement a plentiful
       harvest, and by the hands of His Holy Angels to store it in His Holy barn in Heaven: But the
       foxes of Samson, two-faced like them who have fallen into the sin of heresy, having their
       faces looking both ways but tied together by their burning tails, run about with many torches
       amidst the fields of the Lord now white unto harvest and shining with the splendour of the
       faith, and bitterly despoil them, speeding most cunningly here and there, and with their
       strong attacks burning, dissipating, and decastation, and subtly and damnably subverting the
       truth of the Holy Catholic Faith.
             Wherefore, since you, N., are fallen into the damned heresies of witches, practising
       them publicly in such place (naming it), and have been by legitimate witnesses convicted of
       the sin of heresy, or by your own confession received by us in Court; and after your capture
       you have escaped, refusing the medicine of your salvation: therefore we have summoned
       you to answer for the said crimes in person before us, but you, led away and seduced by a
       wicked spirit, have refused to appear.
                                                               Or as follows:
             Wherefore, since you, N., have been accused before us of the sin of heresy, and from
       information received against you we have judged that you are under a light suspicion of that
       sin, we have summoned you to appear personally before us to answer for the Catholic faith.
       And since, having been summoned, you have defiantly refused to appear, we
       excommunicated you and caused you to be proclaimed excommunicate. And in this state
       you have remained stubborn for a year, or so many years, hiding here and there, so that even
       now we do not know whither the evil spirit has led you; and though we have awaited you
       kindly and mercifully, that you might return to the bosom and the unity of the Holy Faith,
       you being wholly given up to evil have scorned to do so. Yet we wish and are bound to
       justice to conclude this case beyond any question, now can we pass over with connivent
       eyes your iniquitous crimes.
             We the Bishop and Judges in the said cause on behalf of the faith require and strictly
       command by this our present public edict that you the aforesaid, at present in hiding and
       runaway and fugitive, shall on such a day of such a month in such a year, in such Cathedral
       Church of such Diocese, at the hour of Terce appear personally before us to hear your final
       sentence: signifying that, whether you appear or not, we shall proceed to our definitive
       sentence against you as law and justice shall require. And that our summons may come to
       your knowledge beforehand and you may not be able to protect yourself with a plea of
       ignorance, we wish and command that our said present letters, requisition and summons be
       publically affixed to the doors of the said Cathedral Church. In witness of all which we have
       ordered these our present letters to be authorized by the impressions of our seals. Given, etc.
             On the appointed day assigned for the hearing of the final sentence, if the fugitive shall


file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_32a.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:04:19 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXXII

       have appeared and consented to abjure publicly all heresy, humbly praying to be admitted to
       mercy, he is to be admitted if he has not been a backslider; and if he was convicted by his
       own confession or by the legitimate production of witnesses, he shall abjure and repent as a
       penitent heretic, according to the manner explained in the eighth method of concluding a
       process on behalf of the faith. If he was gravely suspected, and refused to appear when he
       was summoned to answer for his faith, and was therefore excommunicated and had endured
       that excommunication obstinately for a year, but becomes penitent, let him be admitted, and
       abjure all heresy, in the manner explained in the sixth method of pronouncing sentence. But
       if he shall appear, and not consent to abjure, let him be delivered as a truly impenitent
       heretic to the secular Court, as was explained in the tenth method. But if he still defiantly
       refuses to appear, let the sentence be pronounced in the following manner:
             We, N., by the mercy of God Bishop of such city, seeing that you, N., of such a place
       in such a Diocese were accused before us by public report and the information of worthy
       men of the sin of heresy: We, whose duty it is, proceeded to examine and inquire whether
       there was any truth in the report which had come to our ears. And finding that you were
       convicted of heresy by the depositions of many credible witnesses, we commanded that you
       be brought before us in custody. (Here let it be said whether he had appeared and been
       questioned under oath or not.) But afterwards, led away and seduced by the advice of the
       evil spirit, and fearing to have your wounds wholesomely healed with wine and oil, you fled
       away (or, if it was the case, You broke from your prison and place of detention and fled
       away), hiding here and there, and we are altogether ignorant of whither the said evil spirit
       has led you.
                                                          Or after this manner:
            And finding that against you, accused as aforesaid before us of the sin of heresy, there
       were many indications by reason of which we judged you to be lightly suspected of the said
       heresy, we summoned you by public edict in such and such churches of such Diocese within
       a certain time assigned to appear in person before to answer to the said charges against you
       and otherwise on matter concerning the Faith. But you, following some mad advice,
       obstinately refused to appear. And when, as in justice bound, we excommunicated you and
       caused you to be publicly proclaimed excommunicate, you stubbornly remained in that
       excommunication for more than a year, and kept hidden here and there, so that we do not
       know whither the evil spirit has led you.
            And where the Holy Church of God has long awaited you up to this present day in
       kindness and mercy, that you might fly to the bosom of her mercy, renouncing your errors
       and professing the Catholic Faith, and be nourished by the bounty of her mercy; but you
       have refused to consent, persisting in your obstinacy; and since we wished and still wish, as
       we ought to do and as justice compels us, to bring your case to an equitable conclusion, we
       have summoned you to appear in person before us on this day at this hour and place, to hear
       your final sentence. And since you have stubbornly refused to appear, you are manifestly
       proved to abide permanently in your errors and heresies; and this we say with grief, and
       grieve in saying it.
            But since we cannot and will not delay to do justice, nor may we tolerate so great
       disobedience and defiance of the Church of God; for the exaltation of the Catholic Faith and
       the extirpation of vile heresy, at the call of justice, and by reason of your disobedience and


file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_32a.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:04:19 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXXII

       obstinacy, on this day and at this hour and place heretofore strictly and precisely assigned to
       you for the hearing of your final sentence, having diligently and carefully discussed each
       several circumstance of the process with learned men in the Theological faculty and in the
       Canon and Civil Laws, sitting in tribunal as Judges judging, having before us the Holy
       Gospels that our judgement may proceed as from the countenance of God and our eyes see
       with equity, and having before our eyes only God and the irrefragable truth of the Holy
       Faith, and following in the footsteps of the Blessed Apostle Paul, in these writings we
       pronounce final sentence against you, N., absent or present, as follows, invoking the Name
       of Christ.
             We the Bishop and Judges named on behalf of the Faith, whereas the process of this
       cause on behalf of the Faith has in all things been conducted as the laws require; and
       whereas you, having been legally summoned, have not appeared, and have not by yourself
       or any other person excused yourself; and whereas you have for a long time persisted and
       still obstinately persist in the said heresies, and have endured excommunication in the cause
       of the Faith for so many years, and still stubbornly endure it; and whereas the Holy Church
       of God can do no more for you, since you have persisted and intend to persist in your
       excommunication and said heresies: Therefore, following in the footsteps of the Blessed
       Apostle Paul, we declare, judge and sentence you, absent or present, to be a stubborn
       heretic, and as such to be abandoned to secular justice. And by this our definitive sentence
       we drive you from the ecclesiastical Court, and abandon you to the power of the secular
       Court; earnestly praying the said Court that, if ever it should have you in its power, it will
       moderate its sentence of death against you. This sentence was give, etc.
             Here it is to be considered that, if that stubborn fugitive had been convicted of heresy,
       either by his own confession or by credible witnesses, and had fled before his abjuration, he
       is by the sentence to be judged an impenitent heretic, and so it must be expressed in the
       sentence. But if, on the other hand, he had not been convicted, but had been summoned as
       one under suspicion to answer for his faith; and, because he has refused to appear, has been
       excommunicated, and has obstinately endured that excommunication for more than a year,
       and has finally refused to appear; then he is not to be judged a heretic, but as a heretic, and
       must be condemned as such; and so it must be expressed in the sentence,as it is said above.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                         Question XXXIII

                                                        Main Index


                                                Part III, Third Head, Question XXXII
                                               was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_32a.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:04:19 PM]
Notes

           “Samson.” “Judges” xv, 1-6.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/notes/n3026.html [2002-01-20 12:04:19 PM]
 Part III, Question XXXIII


                                     THE
                             MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                  PART III, QUESTION XXXIII.
Of the Method of passing Sentence upon one who has been Accused by another Witch, who has been or is
                                      to be Burned at the Stake.

              The fourteenth method of finally concluding a process on behalf of the Faith is used
        when the person accused of heresy, after a careful discussion of the circumstances of the
        process with reference to the informant in consultation with learned lawyers, is found to be
        accused of that heresy only by another witch who has been or is to be burned. And this can
        happen in thirteen ways in thirteen cases. For a person so accused is either found innocent
        and is to be freely discharged; or she is found to be generally defamed for that heresy; or it
        is found that, in addition to her defamation, she is to be to some degree exposed to torture;
        or she is found to be strongly suspected of heresy; or she is found to be at the same time
        defamed and suspected; and so on up to thirteen different cases, as was shown in the
        Twentieth Question.
              The first case is when she is accused only by a witch in custody, and is not convicted
        either by her own confession or by legitimate witnesses, and there are no other indications
        found by reason of which she can truly be regarded as suspect. In such a case she is to be
        entirely absolved, even by the secular Judge himself who has either burned the deponent or
        is about to burn her either on his own authority or on that commissioned to him by the
        Bishop and Judge of the Ordinary Court; and she shall be absolved in the manner explained
        in the Twentieth Question.
              The second case is when, in addition to being accused by a witch in custody, she is also
        publicly defamed throughout the whole village or city; so that she has always laboured
        under that particular defamation, but, after the deposition of the witch, it has become
        aggravated.
              In such a case the following should be the procedure. The Judge should consider that,
        apart from the general report, nothing particular has been proved against her by other
        credible witnesses in the village or town; and although, perhaps, that witch has deposed
        some serious charges against her, yet, since has lost her faith by denying it to the devil,
        Judges should give no ready credence to her words, unless there should be other
        circumstances which aggravate that report; and then the case would fall under the third and
        following case. Therefore she should be enjoined a canonical purgation, and the sentence
        should be pronounced as shown in the Twenty-first Question.
              And if the civil Judge orders this purgation to the be made before the Bishop, and ends
        with a solemn declaration that, if she should fail, then, as an example to others, she should
        be more severely sentenced by both the ecclesiastical and civil Judges, well and good. But if
        he wishes to conduct it himself, let him command her to find ten or twenty compurgators of
        her own class, and proceed in accordance with the second method of sentencing such:
        except that, if she has to be excommunicated, then he must have recourse to the Ordinary;


 file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_33a.html (1 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:20 PM]
Part III, Question XXXIII

       and this would be the case if she refused to purge herself.
             The third case, then, happens when the person so accused is not convicted by her own
       confession, not by the evidence of the facts, nor by credible witnesses, nor are there any
       other indications as to any fact in which she had ever been marked by the other inhabitants
       of that town or village, except her general reputation among them. But the general report has
       become intensified by the detention of that witch in custody, as that it is said that she had
       been her companion in everything and had participated in her crimes. But even so, the
       accused firmly denies all this, and nothing of it is known to other inhabitants, or of anything
       to save good behaviour on her part, though her companionship with the witch is admitted.
             In such a case the following is the procedure. First they are to be brought face to face,
       and their mutual answers and recriminations noted, to see whether there is any inconsistency
       in their words by reason of which the Judge can decide from her admissions and denials
       whether he ought to expose her to torture; and if so, he can proceed as in the third manner of
       pronouncing a sentence, explained in the Twenty-second Question, submitting her to light
       tortures: at the same time exercising every possible precaution, as we explained at length
       towards the beginning of this Third Part, to find out whether she is innocent or guilty.
             The fourth case is when a person accused in this manner is found to be lightly
       suspected, either because of her own confession or because of the depositions of the other
       witch in custody. There are some who include among those who should be thus lightly
       suspected those who go and consult witches for any purpose, or have procured for
       themselves a lover by stirring up hatred between married folk, or have consorted with
       witches in order to obtain some temporal advantage. But such are to be excommunicated as
       followers of heretics, according to the Canon c. excommunicamus, where it says: Similarly
       we judge those to be heretics who believe in their errors. For the effect is presumed from the
       facts. Therefore it seems that such are to be more severely sentenced and punished than
       those who are under a light suspicion of heresy and are to be judged from light conjectures.
       For example, if they had performed services for witches or carried their letters to them, they
       need not on that account believe in their errors: yet they have not laid information against
       them, and they have received wages and vails from them. But whether or not such people
       are to be included in this case, according to the opinion of learned men the procedure must
       be as in the case of those under light suspicion, and the Judge will act as follows. Such a
       person will either abjure heresy or will purge herself canonically, as was explained in the
       fourth method of pronouncing sentence in the Twenty-third Question.
             However, it seems that the better course is for such a person to be ordered to abjure
       heresy, for this is more in accordance with the meaning of the Canon c. excommunicamus,
       where it speaks of those who are found to be only under some notable suspicion. And if
       such should relapse, they should not incur the penalty for backsliders. The procedure will be
       as above explained in the fourth method of sentencing.
             The fifth case is when such person is found to be under a strong suspicion, by reason,
       as before, of her own confession or of the depositions of the other witch in custody. In this
       class some include those who directly or indirectly obstruct the Court in the process of
       trying a witch, provided that they do this wittingly.
             Also they include all who give help, advice or protection to those who cause such
       obstructions. Also those who instruct summoned or captured heretics to conceal the truth or
       in some way falsify it. Also all those who wittingly receive, or visit those whom they know
       to be heretics, or associate with them, send them gifts, or show favour to them; for all such

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_33a.html (2 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:20 PM]
Part III, Question XXXIII

       actions, when done with full knowledge, bespeak favour felt towards the sin, and not to the
       person. And therefore they say that, when the accused is guilty of any of the above actions,
       and has been proved so after trial, then she should be sentenced in the fifth method,
       explained in the Twenty-fourth Question; so that she must abjure all heresy, under pain of
       being punished as a backslider.
             As to these contentions we may say that the Judge must take into consideration the
       household and family of each several witch who has been burned or is detained; for these
       are generally found to be infected.
             For witches are instructed by devils to offer to them even their own children; therefore
       there can be no doubt that such children are instructed in all manner of crimes, as is shown
       in the First Part of this work.
             Again, in a case of simple heresy it happens that, on account of the familiarity between
       heretics who are akin to each other, when one is convicted of heresy it follows that his
       kindred also are strongly suspected; and the same is true of the heresy of witches.
             But this present case is made clear in the chapter of the Canon inter sollicitudines. For
       a certain Dean was, owing to his reputation as a heretic, enjoined a canonical purgation; on
       account of his familiarity with heretics, he had to make a public abjuration; and through the
       scandal he was deprived of his benefice, so that the scandal might be allayed.
             The sixth case is when such a person is under a grave suspicion; but no simple and bare
       deposition by another witch in custody can cause this, for there must be in addition some
       indication of the facts, derived from certain words or deeds uttered or committed by the
       witch in custody, in which the accused is at least said to have taken some part, and shared in
       the evil deeds of the deponent.
             To understand this, the reader should refer to what was written in the Nineteenth
       Question, especially concerning the grave degree of suspicion, how it arise from grave and
       convincing conjectures; and how the Judge is forced to believe, on mere suspicion, that a
       person is a heretic, although perhaps in his heart he is a true Catholic. The Canonists give an
       example of this by the case, in simple heresy, of a man summoned to answer in the cause of
       the faith, and defiantly refusing to appear, on which account he is excommunicated, and if
       he persists in that state for a year, becomes gravely suspected of heresy.
             And so likewise in the case of person accused in the way we are considering, the
       indications of the facts are to be examined by which she is rendered gravely suspect. Let us
       put the case that the witch in custody has asserted that the accused has taken part in her evil
       works of witchcraft, but the accused firmly denies it. What then is to be done? It will be
       necessary to consider whether there are any facts to engender a strong suspicion of her, and
       whether that strong suspicion can become a grave one. Thus, if a man has been summoned
       to answer some charge, and has obstinately refused to appear, he would come under a light
       suspicion of heresy, even if he had not been summoned in a cause concerning the Faith. But
       if he then refused to appear in a cause concerning the Faith and was excommunicated for his
       obstinacy, then he would be strongly suspected; for the light suspicion would become a
       strong one; and if then he remained obstinate in excommunication for a year, the strong
       suspicion would become a grave one. Therefore the Judge will consider whether, by reason
       of her familiarity with the witch in custody, the accused is under a strong suspicion, in the
       manner shown in the fifth case above; and then he must consider whether there is anything
       which may turn that strong suspicion into a grave one. For it is presumed that it is possible
       for this to be the case, on account of the accused having perhaps shared in the crimes of the

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_33a.html (3 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:20 PM]
Part III, Question XXXIII

       detained witch, if she has had frequent intercourse with her. Therefore the Judge must
       proceed as in the sixth method of sentencing explained in the Twenty-fifth Question. But it
       may be asked what the Judge is to do if the person so accused by a witch in custody still
       altogether persists in her denials, in spite of all indications against her. We answer as
       follows:
             First the Judge must consider whether those denials do or do not proceed from the vice
       or witchcraft of taciturnity: and, as was shown in the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Questions of
       this Third part, the Judge can know this from her ability or inability to shed tears, or from
       her insensibility under torture and quick recovery of her strength afterwards. For then the
       grave suspicion would be aggravated; and in such a case she is by no means to be freely
       discharged, but, according to the sixth method of sentencing, she must be condemned to
       perpetual imprisonment and penance.
             But if she is not infected with the taciturnity of witches, but feels the keenest pains in
       her torture (whereas others, as has been said, become insensible to pain owing to the
       witchcraft of taciturnity), then the Judge must fall back upon his last expedient of a
       canonical purgation. And if this should be ordered by a secular Judge, it is called a lawful
       vulgar purgation, since it cannot be classed with other vulgar purgations. And if she should
       fail in this purgation she will be judged guilty.
             The seventh case is when the accused is not found guilty by his own confession, by the
       evidence of the facts, or by legitimate witnesses, but is only found to be accused by a witch
       in custody, and there are also some indications found which bring him under light or strong
       suspicion. As, for example, that he had had great familiarity with witches; in which case he
       would, according to the Canon, have to undergo a canonical purgation on account of the
       general report concerning him; and on account of the suspicion against him he must abjure
       heresy, under pain of being punished as a backslider if it was a strong suspicion, but not if it
       was a light one.
             The eighth case occurs when the person so accused is found to have confessed that
       heresy, but to be penitent, and never to have relapsed. But here it is to be noted that in this
       and the other cases, where it is a question of those who have or have not relapsed, and who
       are or are not penitent, these distinctions are made only for the benefit of Judges who are not
       concerned with the infliction of the extreme penalty. Therefore the civil Judge may proceed
       in accordance with the Civil and Imperial Laws, as justice shall demand, in the case of one
       who has confessed, no matter whether or not she be penitent, or whether or not she have
       relapsed. Only he may have recourse to those thirteen methods of pronouncing sentence, and
       act in accordance with them, if any doubtful question should arise.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                         Question XXXIV

                                                        Main Index


                                                Part III, Third Head, Question XXXIII


file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_33a.html (4 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:20 PM]
Part III, Question XXXIII

                                                   was transcribed by Christie Rice.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_33a.html (5 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:20 PM]
 Part III, Third Head, Question XXXIV


                                  THE
                          MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                        PART III, THIRD HEAD, QUESTION XXXIV.
Of the Method of passing Sentence upon a Witch who Annuls Spells wrought by Witchcraft; and of Witch
                                   Midwives and Archer-Wizards

              THE fifteenth method of bringing a process on behalf of the faith to a definitive
        sentence is employed when the person accused of heresy is not found to be one who casts
        injurious spells of witchcraft, but one who removes them; and in such a case the procedure
        will be as follows. The remedies which she uses will either be lawful or unlawful; and if
        they are lawful, she is not to be judged a witch but a good Christian. But we have already
        shown at length what sort of remedies are lawful.
              Unlawful remedies, on the other hand, are to be distinguished as either absolutely
        unlawful, or in some respect unlawful. If they are absolutely unlawful, these again can be
        divided into two classes, according as they do or do not involve some injury to another
        party; but in either case they are always accompanied by an expressed invocation of devils.
        But if they are only in some respect unlawful, that is to say, if they are practised with only a
        tacit, and not an expressed, invocation of devils, such are to be judged rather vain than
        unlawful, according to the Canonists and some Theologians, as we have already shown.
              Therefore the Judge, whether ecclesiastical or civil, must not punish the first and last of
        the above practices, having rather to commend the first and tolerate the last, since the
        Canonists maintain that it is lawful to oppose vanity with vanity. But he must by no means
        tolerate those who remove spells by an expressed invocation of devils, especially those who
        in doing so bring some injury upon a third part; and this last is said to happen when the spell
        is taken off one person and transferred to another. And we have already made it clear in a
        former part of this work that it makes no difference whether the person to whom the spell is
        transferred be herself a witch or not or whether or not she be the person who cast the
        original spell, or whether it be a man or any other creature.
              It may be asked what the Judge should do when such a person maintains that she
        removes spells by lawful and not unlawful means; and how the Judge can arrive at the truth
        of such a case. We answer that he should summon her and ask her what remedies she uses;
        but he must not rely only upon her word, for the ecclesiastical Judge whose duty it is must
        make diligent inquiry, either himself or by means of some parish priest who shall examine
        all his parishioners after placing them upon oath, as to what remedies she uses. And if, as is
        usually the case, they are found to be superstitious remedies, they must in no way be
        tolerated, on account of the terrible penalties laid down by the Canon Law, as will be shown.
              Again, it may be asked how the lawful remedies can be distinguished from the
        unlawful, since they always assert that they remove spells by certain prayers and the use of
        herbs. We answer that this will be easy, provided that a diligent inquiry be made. For
        although they must necessarily conceal their superstitious remedies, either that they may not
        be arrested, or that they may the more easily ensnare the minds of the simple, and therefore

 file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_34a.html (1 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:21 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXXIV

       make great show of their use of prayers and herbs, yet they can be manifestly convicted by
       four superstitious actions as sorceresses and witches.
             For there are some who can divine secrets, and are able to tell things which they could
       only know through the revelation of evil spirits. For example: when the injured come to
       them to be healed, they can discover and make known the cause of their injury; and they can
       perfectly know this and tell it to those who consult them.
             Secondly, they sometimes undertake to cure the injury or spell of one person, but will
       have nothing to do with that of another. For in the Diocese of Spires there is a witch in a
       certain place called Zunhofen who, although she seems to heal many persons, confesses that
       she can in no way heal certain others; and this is for no other reason than, as the inhabitants
       of the place assert, that the spells case on such person have been so potently wrought by
       other witches with the help of devils that the devils themselves cannot remove them. For one
       devil cannot or will not always yield to another.
             Thirdly, it sometimes happens that they must make some reservation or exception in
       their cure of such injuries. Such a case is known to have occured in the town of Spires itself.
       And honest woman who had been bewitched in her shins sent for a diviner of this sort to
       come and heal her; and when the witch had entered her house and looked at her, she made
       such an exception. For she said: It there are no scales and hairs in the wound, I could take
       out all the other evil matter. And she revealed the cause of the injury, although she had come
       from the country from a distance of two miles, saying: You quarrelled with your neighbour
       on such a day, and therefore this had happened to you. Then, having extracted from the
       wound many other matters of various sorts, which were not scales or hairs, she restored her
       to health.
             Fourthly, they sometimes themselves observe, or cause to be observed, certain
       superstitious ceremonies. For instance, they fix some such time as before sunrise for people
       to visit them; or say that they cannot heal injuries which were caused beyond the limits of
       the estate on which they live, or that they can only heal two or three persons in a year. Yet
       they do not heal them, but only seem to do so by creasing to injure them.
             We could add many other considerations as touching the condition of such persons: as
       that, after the lapse of a certain time they have incurred the reputation of leading a bad and
       sinful life, or that they are adulteresses, or the survivors from covens of other witches.
       Therefore their gift of healing is not derived from God on account of the sanctity of their
       lives.
             Here we must refer incidentally to witch midwives, who surpass all other witches in
       their crimes, as we have shown in the First Part of this work. And the number of them is so
       great that, as has been found form their confessions, it is thought they there is scarcely any
       tiny hamlet in which at least one is not to be found. And that the magistrates may in some
       degree meet this danger, they should allow no midwife to practise without having been first
       sworn as a good Catholic; at the same time observing the other safeguards mentioned in the
       Second Part of this work.
             Here too we must consider archer-wizards, who constitute the graver danger to the
       Christian religion in that they have obtained protection on the estates of nobles and Princes
       who receive, patronize, and defend them. But that all such receivers and protectors are more
       damnable than all witches, especially in certain cases, is shown as follows. The Canonists
       and Theologians divide into two classes the patrons of such archer-wizards, according as
       they defend the error or the person. They who defend the error are more damnable than the

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_34a.html (2 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:21 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXXIV

       wizards themselves, since they are judged to be not only heretics but heresiarchs (24, quest.
       3). And the laws do not make much special mention of such patrons, because they do not
       distinguish them from other heretics.
             But there are others who, while not excusing the sin, yet defend the sinner. These, for
       example, will do all in their power to protect such wizards (or other heretics) from trial and
       punishment at the hands of the Judge acting on behalf of the Faith.
             Similarly there are those in public authority, that is to say, public persons such as
       temporal Lords, and also spiritual Lords who have temporal jurisdiction, who are, either by
       omission or commission, patrons of such wizards and heretics.
             They are their patrons by omission when they neglect to perform their duty in regard to
       such wizards and suspects, or to their followers, receivers, defenders and patrons, when they
       are required by the Bishops or Inquisitors to do this: that is, by falling to arrest them, by not
       guarding them carefully when they are arrested, by not taking them to the place within their
       jurisdiction which has been appointed for them, by not promptly executing the sentence
       passed upon them, and by other such derelictions of their duty.
             They are their patrons by commission when, after such heretics have been arrested,
       they liberate them from prison without the licence or order of the Bishop or Judge; or when
       they directly or indirectly obstruct the trial, judgement, and sentence of such, or act in some
       similar way. The penalties for this have been declared in the Second Part of this work,
       where we treated of archer-wizards and other enchanters of weapons.
             It is enough now to say that all these are by law excommunicated, and incur the twelve
       great penalties. And if they continues obstinate in that excommunication for a year, they are
       then to be condemned as heretics.
             Who, then, are to be called receivers of such; and are they to be reckoned as heretics?
       All they, we answer, who receive such archer-wizards, enchanters of weapons,
       necromancers, or heretic witches as are the subject of this whole work. And such receivers
       are of two classes, as was the case with the defenders and patrons of such.
             For there are some who do not receive them only once or twice, but many times and
       often; and these are well called in Latin receptatores, from the frequentative form of the
       verb. And receivers of this class are sometimes blameless, since they act in ignorance and
       there is no sinister suspicion attaching to them. But sometimes they are to blame, as being
       well aware of the sins of those whom they receive; for the Church always denounces these
       wizards as the most cruel enemies of the faith. And if nevertheless temporal Lords receive,
       keep and defend them, etc., they are and are rightly called receivers of heretics. And with
       regard to such, the laws say that they are to be excommunicated.
             But others there are who do not often or many times receive such wizards or heretics,
       but only once or twice; and these are not properly called receptatores, but receptores, since
       they are not frequent receivers. (Yet the Arch-deacon disagrees with this view; but it is no
       great matter, for we are considering not words but deeds.)
             But there is this difference between receptatores and receptores: those temporal
       Princes are always receptatores who simply will not or cannot drive away such heretics. But
       receptores may be quite innocent.
             Finally, it is asked who are they who are said to be obstructors of the duty of
       Inquisitors and Bishops against such heretics; and whether they are to be reckoned as
       heretics. We answer that such obstructors are of two kinds. For there are some who cause a
       direct obstruction, by rashly on their own responsibility releasing from gaol those who have

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_34a.html (3 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:21 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXXIV

       been detained on a charge of heresy, or by interfering with the process of the Inquisition by
       wreaking some injury to witnesses on behalf of the Faith because of the evidence they have
       given; or it may be that the temporal Lord issues an order that none but himself may try such
       a case, and that anyone charged with this crime should be brought before no one but
       himself, and that the evidence should be given only in his presence, or some similar order.
       And such, according to Giovanni d'Andrea, are direct obstructors. They who directly
       obstruct the process, judgement or sentence on behalf of the Faith, or help, advise or favour
       others in doing so, although they are guilty of a great sin, are not on that account to be
       judged heretics, unless it appears in other ways that they are obstinately and wilfully
       involved in such heresies of witches. But they are to be smitten with the sword of
       excommunication; and if they stubbornly endure that excommunication for a year, then are
       they to be condemned as heretics.
             But others are indirect obstructors. These, as Giovanni d'Andrea explains, are those
       who give such orders as that no one shall bear arms for the capture of heretics except the
       servants of the said temporal Lord. Such are less guilty than the former, and are not heretics;
       but they, and also any who advise, help or patronize them in such actions, are to be
       excommunicated; and if they obstinately remain in that excommunication for a year, they
       are then to be condemned as if they were heretics. And here it is to be understood that they
       are in such a way to be condemned as heretics that if they are willing to return, they are
       received back to mercy, having first abjured their error; but if not, they are to be handed
       over to the secular Court as impenitents.
             To sum up. Witch-midwives, like other witches, are to be condemned and sentences
       according to the nature of their crimes; and this is true also of those who, as we have said,
       remove spells of witchcraft superstitiously and by the help of devils; for it can hardly be
       doubted that, just as they are able to remove them, so can they inflict them. And it is a fact
       that some definite agreement is formed between witches and devils whereby some shall be
       able to hurt and others to heal, that so they may more easily ensnare the minds of the simple
       and recruit the ranks of their abandoned and hateful society. Archer-wizards and enchanters
       of weapons, who are only protected by being patronized, defended and received by temporal
       Lords, are subject to the same penalties; and they who patronize them, etc., or obstruct the
       officers of justice in their proceedings against them, are subject to all the penalties to which
       the patrons of heretics are liable, and are to be excommunicated. And if after they have
       obstinately endured that excommunication for a year they wish to repent, let them abjure
       that obstruction and patronage, and if not, they must be handed over as impenitents to the
       secular Court. And even if they have not endured their excommunication for a year, such
       obstructors can still be proceeded against as patrons of heretics.
             And all that has been said with regard to patrons, defenders, receivers, and obstructors
       in the case of archer-wizards, etc., applies equally in respect of all other witches who work
       various injuries to men, animals, and the fruits of the earth. But even the witches
       themselves, when in the court of conscience with humble and contrite spirit they weep for
       their sins and make clean confession asking forgiveness, are taken back to mercy. But when
       they are known, those whose duty it is must proceed against them, summoning, examining,
       and detaining them, and in all things proceeding in accordance with the nature of their
       crimes to a definitive and conclusive sentence, as has been shown, if they wish to avoid the
       snare of eternal damnation by reason of the excommunication pronounced upon them by the
       Church when they deliberately fail in their duty.

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_34a.html (4 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:21 PM]
Part III, Third Head, Question XXXIV

                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                         Question XXXV

                                                        Main Index


                                               Part III, Third Head, Question XXXIV
                                               was transcribed by Wicasta Lovelace.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_34a.html (5 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:21 PM]
Part III, Question XXXV


                                  THE
                          MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                                  PART III, QUESTION XXXV.
Finally, of the Method of Passing Sentence upon Witches who Enter or Cause to be Entered an Appeal,
                           whether such be Frivolous or Legitimate and Just.

            But if the Judge perceives that the accused is determined to have recourse to an appeal,
       he must first take note that such appeals are sometimes valid and legitimate, and sometimes
       entirely frivolous. Now it has already been explained that cases concerning the Faith are to
       be conducted in a simple and summary fashion, and therefore that no appeal is admitted in
       such cases. Nevertheless it sometimes happens that Judges, on account of the difficulty of
       the case, gladly prorogue and delay it; therefore they may consider that it would be just to
       allow an appeal when the accused feels that the Judge has really and actually acted towards
       him in a manner contrary to the law and justice; as that he has refused to allow him to
       defend himself, or that he has proceeded to a sentence against the accused on his own
       responsibility and without the counsel of others, or even without consent of the Bishop or
       his Vicar, when he might have taken into consideration much further evidence both for and
       against. For such reasons an appeal may be allowed, but not otherwise.
            Secondly, it is to be noted that, when notice of appeal has been given, the Judge should,
       without perturbation or disturbance, ask for a copy of the appeal, giving his promise that the
       matter shall not be delayed. And when the accused has given him a copy of the appeal, the
       Judge shall notify him that he has yet two days before he need answer it, and after those two
       days thirty more before he need prepare the apostils of the case. And although he may give
       his answer at once, and at once proceed to issue his apostils if he is very expert and
       experienced, yet it is better to act with caution, and fix a term of ten or twenty or twenty-five
       days, reserving to himself the right to prorogue the hearing of the appeal up to the legal limit
       of time.
            Thirdly, let the Judge take care that during the legal and appointed interval he must
       diligently examine and discuss the causes of the appeal and the alleged grounds of objection.
       And if after having taken good counsel he sees that he has unduly and unjustly proceeded
       against the accused, by refusing him permission to defend himself, or by exposing him to
       questions at an unsuitable time, or for any such reason; when the appointed time comes let
       him correct his mistake, carrying the process back to the point and stage where it was when
       the accused asked to be defended, or when he put a term to his examination, etc., and so
       remove the objection; and then let him proceed as we have said. For by the removal of the
       grounds for objection the appeal, which was legitimate, loses its weight.
            But here the circumspect and provident Judge will carefully take note that some
       grounds of objection or reparable; and they are such as we have just spoken of, and are to be
       dealt with in the above manner. But others are irreparable: as when the accused has actually
       and in fact been questioned, but has afterwards escaped and lodged an appeal; or that some
       box or vessel or such instruments as witches use has been seized and burned; or some other


file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_35a.html (1 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:21 PM]
Part III, Question XXXV

       such irreparable and irrevocable action has been committed. In such a case the above
       procedure would not hold good, namely, taking the process back to the point where the
       objection arose.
             Fourthly, the Judge must note that, although thirty days may elapse between his
       receiving the appeal and his completing the apostils of the case, and he can assign to the
       petitioner the last day, that is, the thirtieth, for the hearing of his appeal; yet, that it may not
       seem that the wishes to molest the accused or some under suspicion of unduly harsh
       treatment of him, and that his behaviour may not seem to lend support to the objection
       which has caused the appeal, it is better that he should assign some day within the legal
       limit, such as the tenth or twentieth day, and he can afterwards, if he does not wish to be in a
       hurry, postpone it until the last legal day, saying that he is busy with other affairs.
             Fifthly, the Judge must take care that, when he affixes a term for the accused who is
       appealing and petitioning for apostils, he must provide not only for the giving, but both for
       the giving and receiving of apostils. For if he provided only for the giving of them, then the
       Judge against whom the appeal is lodged would have to discharge the appellant. Therefore
       let him assign to him a term, that is, such a day of such a year, for the giving and receiving
       from the Judge such apostils as he shall have decided to submit.
             Sixthly, he must take care that, in assigning this term, he shall not in his answer say
       that he will give either negative or affirmative apostils; but that he may have opportunity for
       fuller reflection, let him say that he will give such as he shall at the appointed time have
       decided upon.
             Let him also take care that in assigning this term to the appellant he give the appellant
       no opportunity to exercise any malicious precautions or cunning, and that he specify the
       place, day and hour. For example, let him assign the twentieth day of August, in the present
       year, at the hour of vespers, and the chamber of the Judge himself in such a house, in such a
       city, for the giving and receiving of apostils such as shall have been decided upon for such
       appellant.
             Seventhly, let him note that, if he has decided in his mind that the charge against the
       accused justly requires that he should be detained, in assigning the term he must set it down
       that he assigns that term for the giving or receiving of apostils by the appellant in person,
       and that he assigns to the said appellant such a place for giving to him and receiving from
       him apostils; and then it will be fully in the power of the Judge to detain the appellant,
       granted that he has first given negative apostils; but otherwise it will not be so.
             Eighthly, let the Judge take care not to take any further action in respect of the
       appellant, such as arresting him, or questioning him, or liberating him from prison, from the
       time when the appeal is presented to him up to the time when he has returned negative
       apostils.
             To sum up. Note that it often happens that, when the accused is in doubt as to what sort
       of sentence he will receive, since he is conscious of his guilt, he frequently takes refuge in
       an appeal, that so he may escape the Judge's sentence. Therefore he appeals from that Judge,
       advancing some frivolous reason, as that the Judge held him in custody without allowing
       him the customary surety; or in some such way he may colour his frivolous appeal. In this
       case the Judge shall ask for a copy of the appeal; and having received it he shall either at
       once or after two days give his answer and assign to the appellant for the giving and
       receiving of such apostils as shall have been decided upon a certain day, hour, and place,
       within the legal limit, as, for instance, the 25th, 26th or 30th day of such a month. And

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_35a.html (2 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:21 PM]
Part III, Question XXXV

       during the assigned interval the Judge shall diligently examine the copy of the appeal, and
       the reasons or objections upon which it is based, and shall consult with learned lawyers
       whether he shall submit negative apostils, that is, negative answers, and thereby disallow the
       appeal, or whether he shall allow the appeal and submit affirmative and fitting apostils to the
       Judge to whom the appeal is made.
              But if he sees that the reasons for the appeal are frivolous and worthless, and that the
       appellant only wishes to escape or to postpone his sentence, let his apostils be negative and
       refutatory. If, however, he sees that the objections are true and just, and not irreparable; or if
       he is in doubt whether the accused is maliciously causing him trouble, and wishes to clear
       himself of all suspicion, let him grant the appellant affirmative and fitting apostils. And
       when the appointed time for the appellant has arrived, if the Judge has not prepared his
       apostils or answers, or in some other way is not ready, the appellant can at once demand that
       his appeal be heard, and may continue to do so on each successive day up to the thirtieth,
       which is the last day legally allowed for the submission of the apostils.
              But if he has prepared them and is ready, he can at once give his apostils to the
       appellant. If, then, he has decided to give negative or refutatory apostils, he shall, at the
       expiration of the appointed time, submit them in the following manner:
              AND the said Judge, answering to the said appeal, if it may be called an appeal, says
       that he, the Judge, has proceeded and did intend to proceed in accordance with the
       Canonical decrees and the Imperial statutes and laws, and has not departed from the path of
       either law nor intended so to depart, and has in no way acted or intended to act unjustly
       towards the appellant, as is manifest from an examination of the alleged grounds for this
       appeal. For he has not acted unjustly towards him by detaining him and keeping him in
       custody; for he was accused of such heresy, and there was such evidence against him that he
       was worthily convicted of heresy, or was strongly suspected, and as such it was and is just
       that he should be kept in custody: neither has he acted unjustly by refusing him sureties; for
       the crime of heresy is one of the more serious crimes, and the appellant had been convicted
       but persisted in denying the charge, and therefore not even the very best sureties were
       admissable, but he is and was to be detained in prison. And so he shall proceed with the
       other objections.
              Having done this, let him say as follows: Wherefore it is apparant that the Judge has
       duly and justly proceeded, and has not deviated from the path of justice, and has in no way
       unduly molested the appellant; but the appellant, advancing pretended and false objections,
       has by an undue and unjust appeal attempted to escape his sentence. Wherefore his appeal is
       frivolous and worthless, having no foundation, and erring in matter and form. And since the
       laws do not recognize frivolous appeals, nor are they to be recognized by the Judge,
       therefore the Judge has himself said that he does not admit and does not intend to admit the
       said appeal, nor does he recognize nor yet propose to recognize it. And he gives this answer
       to the said accused who make this undue appeal in the form of negative apostils, and
       commands that they be given to him immediately after the said appeal. And so he shall give
       it to the Notary who has presented the appeal to him.
              And when these negative apostils have been given to the appellant, the Judge shall at
       once proceed with his duty, ordering the accused to be seized and detained, or assigning to
       him a day to appear before him, as shall seem best to him. For he does not cease to be the
       Judge, but shall continue his process against the appellant until the Judge to whom the
       appeal was made shall order him to cease.

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_35a.html (3 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:21 PM]
Part III, Question XXXV

             But let the Judge take care not to commence any new proceedings against the appellant,
       by arresting him or, if he is in custody, liberating him from prison, from the time of the
       presentation of the appeal up to the time of the return of negative apostils to him. But after
       that time, as we have said, he can do so if justice requires it, until he is prevented by the
       Judge to whom the appeal has been made. Then, with the process sealed under cover, and
       with a sure and safe escort and if necessary a suitable surety, let him send him to the said
       Judge.
             But if the Judge has decided to return affirmative and fitting apostils, let him submit
       them in writing in the following manner on the arrival of the day appointed for the giving
       and receiving of apostils:
             AND the said Judge, answering to the said appeal, if it may be called an appeal, if it
       may be called an appeal, says that he has proceeded in the present cause justly and as he
       ought and not otherwise, nor has he molested or intended to molest the appellant, as is
       apparent from a perusal of the alleged objections. For he has not molested him by, etc. (Here
       he shall answer to each of the objections in the appeal, in the best and most truthful manner
       that he can.)
             Wherefore it is apparent that the said Judge has in no way dealt unjustly by the
       appellant nor given him cause to appeal, but that the appellant is afraid lest justice should
       proceed against him according to his crimes. And therefore the appeal is frivolous and
       worthless, having no foundation, and not being admissable by the laws or the Judge. But in
       reverence for the Apostolic See, to which the appeal is made, the said Judge says that he
       admits the appeal an intends to recognize it, deferring the whole matter to out Most Holy
       Lord the Pope, and leaving it to the Holy Apostolic See: assigning to the said appellant a
       certain time, namely, so many months now following, within which, with the process sealed
       under cover given to him by the said Judge, or having given suitable sureties to present
       himself at the Court of Rome, or under a sure and safe escort appointed to him by the said
       Judge, he must present himself in the Court of Rome before our Lord the Pope. And this
       answer the said Judge gives tot he said appellant as affirmative apostils, and orders that it be
       given to him immediately after the appeal presented to him. And so he shall hand it to the
       Notary who has presented the appeal to him.
             The prudent Judge must here take note that, as soon as he has given these fitting
       apostils to the appellant, he at once ceases to be the Judge in that cause from which the
       appeal was made, and can proceed no further in it, unless it be referred back to him by our
       Most Holy Lord the Pope. Therefore let him have no more to do with that case, except to
       send the said appellant in the above manner to out Lord the Pope, assign to him a convenient
       time, say one, two or three months, within which he must prepare and make himself ready to
       appear and present himself at the Court of Rome, giving a suitable surety; or, if he cannot do
       this, let him be sent under a sure and safe escort. For he must either bind himself by the best
       means in his power to present himself within the assigned time before our Lord the Pope in
       the Court of Rome, or his appeal must necessarily fall to the ground.
             But if the Judge has another case, and proceeds against the accused in another case in
       which he has not lodged any appeal: in that other case he remains, as before, Judge. And
       even if, after the appeal has been admitted, and the affirmative apostils have been given, the
       appellant is accused and denounced to the Judge in respect of other heresies which were not
       in question in the case from which he appealed, he does not cease to be the Judge, and can
       proceed with the inquiry and the examination of witnesses as before. And when the first

file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_35a.html (4 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:21 PM]
Part III, Question XXXV

       case has been finished in the Court of Rome, or after reference back to the Judge, he is free
       to proceed with the second.
            Let Judges also take care that they send the process to the Court of Rome, sealed and
       under cover, to the Judges appointed to execute justice, together with a digest of the merits
       of the process. And Inquisitors should not concern themselves to appear at Rome against the
       appellants; but should leave them to their own Judges, who, if the Inquisitors are unwilling
       to appear against the appellants, shall provide their own advocates for the appellant, if they
       wish to expedite the case.
            Let Judges also take note that, if they are personally summoned by the appellant, and
       appear, they must beware at all costs against engaging in litigation, but must leave the whole
       process and cause to those Judges, and so manage that they may be able to return as soon as
       possible; so that they may not be sorely troubled with fatigues, misery, labour, and expense
       in Rome. For by this means much damage is caused to the Church, and heretics are greatly
       encouraged; and thereafter Judges will not receive so much respect and reverence, not will
       they be so much feared as before. Also other heretics, seeing the Judges fatigued and
       detained in the Court of Rome, will exalt their horns, and despise and malign them, and
       more boldly proclaim their heresies; and when they are accused, they will appeal in the
       same way. Other Judges, also, will have their authority weakened when they proceed on
       behalf of the Faith and are zealous in extirpating heretics, since they will fear lest they may
       be troubled with miseries and fatigues arising from similar appeals. All this is most
       prejudicial to the Faith of the Holy Church of God; wherefore may the Spouse of that
       Church in mercy preserve her from all such injuries.
                                                                 Page 1 of 1


                                                                 finis

                                                     Letter of Approbation

                                                        Main Index


                                                       Part III, Question XXXV
                                                   was transcribed by Christie Rice.

                          HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                  All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/part_III/mm03_35a.html (5 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:21 PM]
Letter of Aprobation


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM

         OFFICIAL LETTER OF APPROBATION OF THE MALLEUS
       MALEFICARUM FROM THE FACULTY OF THEOLOGY OF THE
               HONOURABLE UNIVERSITY OF COLOGNE

                                        TRANSCRIPTION INCOMPLETE


       T        HE official Document of Approbation of the treatise Malleus Maleficarum, and the
                subscription of the Doctors of the most honourable University of Cologne, duly set forth and
                recorded as a public documents and deposition.


       I   N the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, Amen. Know all men by these presents, whosoever shall
           read, see or hear the tenor of this official and public document, that in the year of our Lord,
           1487, upon a Saturday, being the nineteenth day of the month of May, at the fifth hour after
       noon, or thereabouts, in the third year of the Pontificate of our most Holy Father and Lord, the lord
       Innocent, by divine providence Pope, the eighth of that name, in the very and actual presence of
       me Arnold Kolich, public notary, and in the presence of the witnesses whose names are hereunder
       written and who were convened and especially summoned for this purpose, the Venerable and
       Very Reverend Father Henry Kramer, Professor of Sacred Theology, of the Order of Preachers,
       Inquisitor of heretical depravity, directly delegated thereto by the Holy See together with the
       Venerable and Very Reverend Father James Sprenger, Professor of Sacred Theology and Prior of
       the Dominican Convent at Cologne, being especially appointed as colleague of the said Father
       Henry Kramer, hath on behalf both of himself and his said colleague made known unto us and
       declared that the Supreme Pontiff now happily reigning, lord Innocent, Pope, as hath been set out
       above, hath committed and granted by a bull duly signed and sealed unto the aforesaid Inquisitors
       Henry and James, members of the Order of Preachers and Professors of Sacred Theology, by His
       Supreme Apostolic Authority, the power of making search and inquiry into all heresies, and most
       especially into the heresy of witches, an abomination that thrives and waxes strong in these our
       unhappy days, and he has bidden them diligently to perform this duty throughout the five
       Archdioceses of the five Metropolitan Churches, that is to say, Mainz, Cologne, Trèves, Salzburg
       and Bremen, granting them every faculty of judging and proceeding against such even with the
       power of putting malefactors to death, according to the tenor of the Apostolic bull, which they
       hold and possess and have exhibited unto us, a document which is whole, entire, untouched, and in
       no way lacerated or impaired, in fine whose integrity is above any suspicion. And the tenor of the
       said bull commences thus: “Innocent, Bishop, Servant of the servants of God, for an eternal
       remembrance. Desiring with the most heartfelt anxiety, even as Our Apostleship requires, that the
       Catholic Faith should be especially in this Our day increase and flourish everywhere, . . .” and it

file:///C|/!!witch/mm00f.html (1 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:04:22 PM]
 Letter of Aprobation

        concludes thus: “Given at Rome, at S. Peter's, on the 9 December of the Year of the Incarnation of
        Our Lord one thousand, four hundred and eighty-four, in the first Year of Our Pontificate.”

                                                    Main Index


                                           “The Malleus Maleficarum” was transcribed by
                                                Wicasta Lovelace and Christie Rice.

                         HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                 All Rights Reserved.
ww.WindhavenNetwork.com">Windhaven Network, Inc..
All Rights Reserved.




 file:///C|/!!witch/mm00f.html (2 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:04:22 PM]
Introduction to Online Edition


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                    INTRODUCTION TO ONLINE EDITION
          ●   Editing Parameters                   It was never my intention when setting out to
         ● A Note on References               transcribe the Malleus Maleficarum to write an
                                              introduction to the online edition. My intention was to
         ● Deleted Links
                                              simply transcribe the Malleus in its entirety, along with
         ● Transcription vs. Scanning both the original 1928 introduction and the subsequent

                                              1948 introduction (both written by the Rev. Montague
       Summers), along with the various ancillary material within the edition in my possession. But
       upon transcribing these introductions, I discovered that neither of them were very balanced
       or impartial. This could be expected, as the good Rev. Summers was, I believe, a Catholic
       priest and theologian. He was also apparently a member of the Dominican Order, the same
       order from which Henry Kramer and James Sprenger, the authors of the Malleus
       Maleficarum, were drawn. As such, Summers' point of view may not be exactly impartial, as
       is evidenced by the first line of his 1928 introduction:
             “It has been recognized even from the very earliest of times, during the first gropings
       towards the essential conveniences of social decency and social order, that witchcraft is an
       evil thing, an enemy to light, an ally of the powers of darkness, disruption, and decay.”
             As Rev. Summers translated the Malleus Maleficarum into English, and wrote the
       Introductions, Biblography, and Notes of the edition which I have transcribed for online
       publication, one can understand his natural affinity for the work and, being Christian
       himself, he may be excused for being predisposed to certain prejudices. However
       understanding modern readers may be of Rev. Summers' prejudices, one cannot ignore the
       fact that both of his introductions to the Malleus seem more intent on validating the content
       of the work as an expression of contemporary religious truth rather than a work born of
       Medieval superstition. Indeed, one often expects the good Reverend to wax poetic about the
       good old days of the Inquisition, and times when those horrid witches really got what they
       deserved. There is left no doubt in the reader's mind that Rev. Summers not only believed in
       the existence of witches as the Medieval Church perceived them, but felt that the
       Inquisition, and the Malleus, were both justified and necessary. In both of his introductions
       (especially the original 1928 introduction), he seems more intent on using the occasion to
       convince us that the murder of thousands of innocent people, for the crime of witchcraft,
       during the Inquisition was somehow noble, and that the authors of the Malleus, Heinrich
       Kramer and James Sprenger, were visionaries of their time. One often finds the text of the
       introductions reading as if it had been written 500 years previously when the Malleus was
       originally published and the Inquisition was in full swing.
             I therefore felt it necessary to provide an alternate (and hopefully somewhat more


file:///C|/!!witch/mm00a.html (1 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:36 PM]
Introduction to Online Edition

       balanced and objective) introduction. I will not discuss the relative merits of the Malleus,
       nor theorize as to whether or not the opinions and techniques discussed therein are valid. My
       interest in the work concerns its historical significance, in that whatever our opinions now,
       as the Dover Edition which I have transcribed expresses: “Even if you do not believe in
       witchcraft, the world of 1484 did.”
             It is with that in mind that I hope to approach and examine in this introduction the
       history of the Malleus Maleficarum, as well as its social impact upon its time (as well as on
       our time). And it is my hope that I may be somewhat more concise in my presentation than
       Rev. Summers. With that in mind, I will make every attempt to keep my own prejudices
       firmly in check.
              - Wicasta Lovelace
             The date of the first edition of the Malleus Maleficarum cannot be determined with any
       real authority. It is, however, largely agreed that the most likely date of publication was in
       the year 1486. There were fourteen editions between 1487 and 1520, and at least sixteen
       editions between 1574 and 1669. There are modern translations as well: Der Hexenhammer,
       J.W.R. Schmidt, 1906, and an English translation (with introduction) by Montague
       Summers, published in 1928 and reprinted in 1948. The online edition of the Malleus is, of
       course, drawn from this latter edition. My copy is a reprint of this edition, which was first
       published in 1971 by Dover Publications and which is still in print today.
             When the Malleus was submitted to the University of Cologne by
       the authors on May 9th, 1487, it was officially approved by all of the
       Doctors of the Theological faculty. Due to the especial weight given to
       the book by the Bull of Pope Innocent VIII (given to Heinrich and
       Sprenger two years previously, authorizing them to continue the
       Inquisition in the Alps. It allegedly was included with the text of the
       Malleus to make it appear that the whole book enjoyed papal sanction)
       and the Official Letter of Approbation by the Faculty of Theology of the
       University of Cologne, the Malleus was immediately accepted as a work
                                                                                          View Cover
       of importance. There is no doubt that it had, in its day, and for a couple
       of centuries afterwards, an enormous influence on contemporary society. It was continually
       quoted and appealed to in the witch-trials of Germany, France, Italy, and England. It
       remained in such use for over three hundred years.
             In the Malleus Maleficarum, contemporary cases illustrate methods by which witches
       attempt to control and subvert the world: How and why women roast their first-born male
       child; the confession of how to raise a tempest by a washwoman suspended “hardly clear of
       the ground” by her thumbs; methods of making a formal pact with the Devil; how witches
       deprive men of their “vital member”; and many others. Methods of destroying and curing
       witchcraft, such as remedies against incubus and succubus devils.
             Formal rules for initiating a process of justice were set down: how it should be
       conducted and the method of pronouncing sentence; when to use the trial by red-hot iron
       and other methods of torture for extracting confessions; how the body was to be shaved and
       searched for tokens and amulets of the Devil, including those sewn under the skin (often a
       birthmark, or a mole, or even freckles, were seen as a mark of Satan; indeed, nearly any
       blemish upon the skin could be interpreted as proof of a pact made with the Devil).

file:///C|/!!witch/mm00a.html (2 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:36 PM]
Introduction to Online Edition

             As Rev. Montague Summers said in his 1928 introduction, the Malleus was the
       casebook on every magistrate's desk, and remained so, literally, for centuries. For that alone
       it has earned its dubious place in history, and should not be forgotten.
             This famous document should interest the historian, the student of witchcraft and the
       occult, and the psychologist who is interested in the medieval mind as it was confronted
       with various forces which could only be explained as witchcraft. With the rise of the
       Religious Right in America, and the ever-increasing intolerance of minority religions by
       radical Christians, the lessons contained in the Malleus Maleficarum are lessons which none
       of us can afford to forget. Because of the misconceptions and fears heaped upon minority
       religions by the Inquisition, which was fueled in part by the contents of the Malleus and the
       treatises set forth within it, the Malleus Maleficarum is as contemporary today as it was in
       its own time. We must remember those who suffered because of it. And perhaps, by our
       awareness, we can make certain that history does not repeat itself.

                                                  Main Index




                                                                      Purchase the
                                                                  Malleus Maleficarum
                                                                   from Amazon.Com


                                                  View Cover




                                         “The Malleus Maleficarum” was transcribed by
                                              Wicasta Lovelace and Christie Rice.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/mm00a.html (3 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:36 PM]
Introduction to Online Edition - Editing Parameters


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                   INTRODUCTION TO ONLINE EDITION
                                                 EDITING PARAMETERS
             The full text of the Malleus Maleficarum as translated by Rev. Montague Summers has
       been preserved in this online edition. While there may have been occasional mis-types made
       during the transcription of the text, there are many instances where words are simply spelled
       differently than that which the modern reader is used to. An example of this is the spelling
       of pharoah as pharao, and the frequent spelling of fulfill as fulfil. There are man other
       examples of this sort within the text of the Malleus, and most of these will be evident by
       their frequent use.
             I have decided against editing these differences in spelling and diction, hoping instead
       to preserve the integrity of Rev. Summer's translation verbatum. I am confident that the
       modern reader can overlook these minor differences with little effort.
              - Wicasta Lovelace

                                                      Main Index




                                                                       Purchase the
                                                                   Malleus Maleficarum
                                                                    from Amazon.Com


                                                      View Cover




                                          “The Malleus Maleficarum” was transcribed by
                                               Wicasta Lovelace and Christie Rice.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.



file:///C|/!!witch/mm00a1.html [2002-01-20 12:04:36 PM]
Introduction to Online Edition - References


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                   INTRODUCTION TO ONLINE EDITION
                                              A NOTE ON REFERENCES
            The reader will, no doubt, notice many strange references in the text of the Malleus
       Maleficarum. Many are simply references to the works of other scholars, such as Aristotle,
       St. Augustine, S. Thomas, etc. But on many occasions references are made to books of The
       Bible which may seem strange to most modern readers (at least to non-Catholic Christian
       denominations). Those readers whose familiarity with The Bible comes from the King
       James Version may be surprised by the references to these “obscure” books of The Bible,
       such as Paralipomenon, Apocalypse, Judith, and Tobias. These books were originally a part
       of The Bible, but were cut from the King James version as it was developed. They exist
       today primarily as a part of the Douay Rheims Version of The Bible, which is widely used
       by Catholics.
            An online version of the Douay Rheims Bible exists at;
              http://davinci.marc.gatech.edu/catholic/scriptures/douay.htm

            The second phase of the online implementation of the Malleus Maleficarum will see
       links installed to all references made within the Malleus where online counterparts exist.
       This phase of the online Malleus will be implemented when the transcription of the text is
       complete. It will also incorporate many of those references directly from this web site.

                                                  Main Index




                                                                       Purchase the
                                                                   Malleus Maleficarum
                                                                    from Amazon.Com


                                                  View Cover




file:///C|/!!witch/mm00a2.html (1 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:04:37 PM]
Introduction to Online Edition - References

                                         “The Malleus Maleficarum” was transcribed by
                                              Wicasta Lovelace and Christie Rice.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/mm00a2.html (2 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:04:37 PM]
Introduction to Online Edition - Deleted Links


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                   INTRODUCTION TO ONLINE EDITION
                                                      DELETED LINKS
             Many long-time participants in this project will no doubt notice that the reference links
       have been removed, except for those to the notes of Rev. Summers which were a part of the
       version of the Malleus Maleficarum which is being transcribed. I had originally attempted to
       link all of the references made in the text to online editions where possible. However, this
       proved to be incredibly time consuming, both in coding the HTML links and in locating
       online editions. And for this reason the effort was abandoned.
             The primary focus concerning the transcription of the Malleus Maleficarum is now the
       text itself. It seems most important, given the interest generated by this project, that the text
       be posted as quickly as possible. Eliminating the links to the references, and the subsequent
       effort that entails, has allowed the transcribing of the text to proceed at a greatly accelerated
       pace. As such, the full text of the Malleus will be posted within a few months.
             The links to the references will still be installed, but subsequent to the complete
       transcription and posting of the text.

                                                 Main Index




                                                                  Purchase the
                                                              Malleus Maleficarum
                                                               from Amazon.Com


                                                 View Cover




                                          “The Malleus Maleficarum” was transcribed by
                                               Wicasta Lovelace and Christie Rice.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.


file:///C|/!!witch/mm00a3.html [2002-01-20 12:04:38 PM]
Introduction to Online Edition - Transcription vs. Scanning


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                   INTRODUCTION TO ONLINE EDITION
                                         TRANSCRIPTION vs. SCANNING
              Many participants in this project have questioned my determination to transcribe the
       text of the Malleus Maleficarum by hand, as opposed to scanning the pages and using
       Optical Character Recognition (OCR) software to generate the text. While it is certain that
       the latter would prove more expedient and see the online edition posted much sooner,
       transcribing the text, while more labor intensive, ensures a more accurate translation to
       HTML format. While I understand that transcribing the text means it will take longer to post
       it, I believe that the more reliable translation is more than worth the additional effort.
              I apologize to anyone who is inconvenienced by this approach (those college students
       who wish to use the text of the Malleus as part of their thesis come to mind). However, I
       believe that the importance of the Malleus Maleficarum to modern readers, especially in a
       time when the rhetoric of the Religious Right grows stronger day by day (rhetoric which
       regards the occult, witchcraft, and even homosexuality, with an intolerance reminiscent of
       the Inquisition), overshadows any temporary inconvenience. I want this online edition to be
       as accurate a translation as possible, with mistakes and misprints limited to a minimum.
              In an age in which the Malleus Maleficarum could again achieve a relevance in the
       hands of radical Christian leaders, the accuracy of this online translation is, I believe,
       all-important.
              - Wicasta Lovelace
                 December 15, 1998.

                                                   Main Index




                                                                       Purchase the
                                                                   Malleus Maleficarum
                                                                    from Amazon.Com


                                                   View Cover




file:///C|/!!witch/mm00a4.html (1 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:04:38 PM]
Introduction to Online Edition - Transcription vs. Scanning




                                          “The Malleus Maleficarum” was transcribed by
                                               Wicasta Lovelace and Christie Rice.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/mm00a4.html (2 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:04:38 PM]
The Bull of Innocent VIII


                                    THE
                            MALLEUS MALEFICARUM

                               THE BULL OF INNOCENT VIII
 Innocent, Bishop, Servant of the servants of God, for an eternal remembrance.
             Desiring with the most hearfelt anxiety, even as Our Apostleship requires, that the Catholic
       faith should especially in this Our day increase and flourish everywhere, and that all heretical
       depravity should be driven far from the frontiers and bournes of the Faithful, We very gladly
       proclaim and even restate those particular means and methods whereby Our pious desire may
       obtain its wished effect, since when all errors are uprooted by Our diligent avocation as by the hoe
       of a provident husbandman, a zeal for, and the regular observance of, Our holy Faith will be all the
       more strongly impressed upon the hearts of the faithful.
             It has indeed lately come to Our ears, not without afflicting Us with bitter sorrow, that in
       some parts of Northern Germany, as well as in the provinces, townships, territories, districts, and
       dioceses of Mainz, Cologne, Tréves, Salzburg, and Bremen, many persons of both sexes,
       unmindful of their own salvation and straying from the Catholic Faith, have abandoned themselves
       to devils, incubi and succubi, and by their incantations, spells, conjurations, and other accursed
       charms and crafts, enormities and horrid offences, have slain infants yet in the mother's womb, as
       also the offspring of cattle, have blasted the produce of the earth, the grapes of the vine, the fruits
       of the trees, nay, men and women, beasts of burthen, herd-beasts, as well as animals of other kinds,
       vineyards, orchards, meadows, pasture-land, corn, wheat, and all other cereals; these wretches
       furthermore afflict and torment men and women, beasts of burthen, herd-beasts, as well as animals
       of other kinds, with terrible and piteous pains and sore diseases, both internal and external; they
       hinder men from performing the sexual act and women from conceiving, whence husbands cannot
       know their wives nor wives receive their husbands; over and above this, they blasphemously
       renounce that Faith which is theirs by the Sacrament of Baptism, and at the instigation of the
       Enemy of Mankind they do not shrink from committing and perpetrating the foulest abominations
       and filthiest excesses to the deadly peril of their own souls, whereby they outrage the Divine
       Majesty and are a cause of scandal and danger to very many. And although Our dear sons Henry
       Kramer and James Sprenger, Professors of Theology, of the Order of Friars Preachers, have been
       by Letters Apostolic delegated as Inquisitors of these heretical pravities, and still are Inquisitors,
       the first in the aforesaid parts of Northern Germany, wherein are included those aforesaid
       townships, districts, dioceses, and other specified localities, and the second in certain territories
       which lie along the borders of the Rhine, nevertheless not a few clerics and lay folk of those
       countries, seeking too curiously to know more than concerns them, since in the aforesaid
       delegatory letters there is no express and specific mention by name of these provinces, townships,
       dioceses, and districts, and further since the two delegates themselves and the abominations they
       are to encounter are not designated in detailed and particular fashion, these persons are not
       ashamed to contend with the most unblushing effrontery that these enormities are not practised in
       these provinces, and consequently the aforesaid Inquisitors have no legal right to exercise their

file:///C|/!!witch/mm00e.html (1 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:38 PM]
The Bull of Innocent VIII

       powers of inquisition in the provinces, townships, dioceses, districts, and territories, which have
       been rehearsed, and that the Inquisitors may not proceed to punish, imprison, and penalize
       criminals convicted of the heinous offences and many wickednesses which have been set forth.
       Accordingly in the aforesaid provinces, townships, dioceses, and districts, the abominations and
       enormities in question remain unpunished not without open danger to the souls of many and peril
       of eternal damnation.
              Wherefore We, as is Our duty, being wholly desirous of removing all hindrances and
       obstacles by which the good work of the Inquisitors may be let and tarded, as also of applying
       potent remedies to prevent the disease of heresy and other turpitudes diffusing their poison to the
       destruction of many innocent souls, since Our zeal for the Faith especially incites us, lest that the
       provinces, townships, dioceses, districts, and territories of Germany, which We had specified, be
       deprived of the benefits of the Holy Office thereto assigned, by the tenor of these presents in virtue
       of Our Apostolic authority We decree and enjoin that the aforesaid Inquisitors be empowered to
       proceed to the just correction, imprisonment, and punishment of any persons, without let or
       hindrance, in every way as if the provinces, townships, dioceses, districts, territories, yea, even the
       persons and their crimes in this kind were named and particularly designated in Our letters.
       Moreover, for greater surety We extend these letters deputing this authority to cover all the
       aforesaid provinces, townships, dioceses, districts, territories, persons, and crimes newly
       rehearsed, and We grant permission to the aforesaid Inquisitors, to one separately or to both, as
       also to Our dear son John Gremper, priest of the diocese of Constance, Master of Arts, their
       notary, or to any other public notary, who shall be by them, or by one of them, temporarily
       delegated to those provinces, townships, dioceses, districts, and aforesaid territories, to proceed,
       according to the regulations of the Inquisition, against any persons of whatsoever rank and high
       estate, correcting, mulcting, imprisoning, punishing, as their crimes merit, those whom they have
       found guilty, the penalty being adapted to the offence. Moreover, they shall enjoy a full and
       perfect faculty of expounding and preaching the word of God to the faithful, so often as
       opportunity may offer and it may seem good to them, in each and every parish church of the said
       provinces, and they shall freely and lawfully perform any rites or execute any business which may
       appear advisable in the aforesaid cases. By Our supreme authority We grant them anew full and
       complete faculties.
              At the same time by Letters Apostolic We require Our venerable Brother, the Bishop of
       Strasburg (Albrecht von Bayern, 1478-1506 - ed.), that he himself shall announce, or by some
       other or others cause to be announced, the burthen if Our Bull, which he shall solemnly publish
       when and so often as he deems it necessary, or when he shall be requested so to do by the
       Inquisitors or by one of them. Nor shall he suffer them in disobedience to the tenor of these
       presents to be molested or hindered by any authority whatsoever, but he shall threaten all who
       endeavour to hinder or harass the Inquisitors, all who oppose them, all rebels, of whatsoever rank,
       estate, position, pre-eminence, dignity, or any condition they may be, or whatsoever privilege or
       exemption they may claim, with excommunication, suspension, interdict, and yet more terrible
       penalties, censures, and punishment, as may seem good to him, and that without any right of
       appeal, and if he will he may by Our authority aggravate and renew these penalties as often as he
       list, calling in, if so please him, the help of the secular arm.
              Non obstantibus . . . Let no man therefore . . . But if any dare to do so, which God forbid, let
       him know that upon him will fall the wrath of Almighty God, and of the Blessed Apostles Peter
       and Paul.


file:///C|/!!witch/mm00e.html (2 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:38 PM]
The Bull of Innocent VIII

            Given at Rome, at S. Peter's, on the 9 December of the Year of the Incarnation of Our Lord
       one thousand four hundred and eighty-four, in the first year of Our Pontificate.

The translation of this Bull is reprinted by permission from "The Geography of Witchcraft," by Montague Summers, pp.
                                                   533-6 (Kegan Paul).


                                                  Main Index


                                         “The Malleus Maleficarum” was transcribed by
                                              Wicasta Lovelace and Christie Rice.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/mm00e.html (3 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:38 PM]
Introduction of 1948 Edition


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM

                         INTRODUCTION TO 1948 EDITION
             It has been observed that “it is quite impossible to appreciate and understand the true and
       inner lives of men and women in Elizabethan and Stuart England, in the France of Louis XIII and
       during the long reign of his son and successor, in Italy of the Renaissance and the Catholic
       Reaction - to name but three European countries and a few definite periods - unless we have some
       realization of the part that Witchcraft played in those ages amid the affairs of these Kingdoms. All
       classes were affected and concerned from Pope to peasant, from Queen to cottage girl.”
             Witchcraft was inextricably mixed with politics. Matthew Paris tells us how in 1232 the Chief
       Justice Hubert de Burgh, Earl of Kent, (Shakespeare's “gentle Hubert” in King John), was accused
       by Peter do Roches, Bishop of Winchester, of having won the favour of Henry III through “charms
       and incantations”. In 1324 there was a terrific scandal at Coventry when it was discovered that a
       number of the richest and most influential burghers of the town had long been consulting with
       Master John, a professional necromancer, and paying him large sums to bring about by his arts the
       death of Edward II and several nobles of the court. Alice Perrers, the mistress pf Edward III, was
       not only reputed to have infatuated the old King by occult spells, but her physician (believed to be
       a mighty sorcerer) was arrested on a charge of confecting love philtres and talismans. Henry V, in
       the autumn of 1419, prosecuted his stepmother, Joan of Navarre, for attempting to kill him by
       witchcraft, “in the most horrible manner that one could devise.” The conqueror of Agincourt was
       exceedingly worried about the whole wretched business, as also was the Archbishop of
       Canterbury, who ordered public prayers for the King's safety. In the reign of his son, Henry VI, in
       1441, one of the highest and noblest ladies in the realm, Eleanor Cobham, Duchess of Gloucester,
       was arraigned for conspiring with “a clerk”, Roger Bolingbroke, “a most notorious evoker of
       demons”, and “the most famous scholar in the whole world in astrology in magic”, to procure the
       death of the young monarch by sorcery, so that the Duke of Gloucester, Henry's uncle and
       guardian, might succeed to the crown. In this plot were further involved Canon Thomas Southwell,
       and a “relapsed witch”, that is to say, one who had previously (eleven years before) been
       incarcerated upon grave suspicion of black magic, Margery Jourdemayne. Bolingbroke, whose
       confession implicated the Duchess, was hanged; Canon Southwell died in prison; the witch in
       Smithfield was “burn'd to Ashes”, since her offence was high treason. The Duchess was sentenced
       to a most degrading public penance, and imprisoned for life in Peel Castle, Isle of Man. Richard
       III, upon seizing the throne in 1483, declared that the marriage of his brother, Edward IV, with the
       Lady Elizabeth Grey, had been brought about by “sorcery and witchcraft”, and further that
       “Edward's wife, that monstrous witch, has plotted with Jane Shore to waste and wither his body.”
       Poor Jane Shore did most exemplary penance, walking the flinty streets of London barefoot in her
       kirtle. In the same year when Richard wanted to get rid of the Duke of Buckingham, his former
       ally, one of the chief accusations he launched was that the Duke consulted with a Cambridge
       “necromancer” to compass and devise his death.

file:///C|/!!witch/mm00b.html (1 of 6) [2002-01-20 12:04:39 PM]
Introduction of 1948 Edition

             One of the most serious and frightening events in the life of James VII of Scotland
       (afterwards James I of England) was the great conspiracy of 1590, organized by the Earl of
       Bothwell. James with good reason feared and hated Bothwell, who, events amply proved, was
       Grand Master of more than one hundred witches, all adepts in poisoning, and all eager to do away
       with the King. In other words, Francis Stewart, Earl of Bothwell, was the centre and head of a vast
       political plot. A widespread popular panic was the result of the discovery of this murderous
       conspiracy.
             In France as early as 583, when the infant son and heir of King Chilperic, died of dysentery,
       as the doctors diagnosed it, it came to light that Mumolus, one of the leading officials of the court,
       had been secretly administering to the child medicines, which he obtained from “certain witches of
       Paris”. These potions were pronounced by the physicians to be strong poisons. In 1308, Guichard,
       Bishop of Troyes, was accused of having slain by sorcery the Queen of Philip IV of France
       (1285-1314), Jeanne of Navarre, who died three years before. The trial dragged on from 1308 to
       1313, and many witnesses attested on oath that the prelate had continually visited certain notorious
       witches, who supplied him philtres and draughts. In 1315, during the brief reign (1314-1316) of
       Louis X, the eldest son of Philip IV, was hanged Enguerrand de Marigny, chamberlain, privy
       councillor, and chief favourite of Philip, whom, it was alleged, he had bewitched to gain the royal
       favour. The fact, however, which sealed his doom was his consultation with one Jacobus de Lor, a
       warlock, who was to furnish a nostrum warranted to put a very short term to the life of King Louis.
       Jacobus strangled himself in prison.
             In 1317 Hugues Géraud, Bishop of Cahors, was executed by Pope John XXII, who reigned
       1316-1334, residing at Avignon. Langlois says that the Bishop had attempted the Pontiff's life by
       poison procured from witches.
             Perhaps the most resounding of all scandals of this kind in France was the La Voison case,
       1679-1682, when it was discovered that Madame de Montespan had for years been trafficking with
       a gang of poisoners and sorcerers, who plotted the death of the Queen and the Dauphan, so that
       Louis XIV might be free to wed Athénais de Montespan, whose children should inherit the throne.
       The Duchesse de Fontanges, a beautiful young country girl, who had for a while attracted the
       wayward fancy of Louis, they poisoned out of hand. Money was poured out like water, and it has
       been said that “the entire floodtide of poison, witchcraft and diabolism was unloosed” to attain the
       ends of that “marvellous beauty” (so Mme. de Sévigné calls her), the haughty and reckless
       Marquise de Montespan. In her thwarted fury she well nigh resolved to sacrifice Louis himself to
       her overweening ambition and her boundless pride. The highest names in France - the Princesse de
       Tingry, the Duchesse de Vitry, the Duchesse de Lusignan, the Duchesse de Bouillon, the Comtesse
       de Soissons, the Duc de Luxembourg, the Marguis de Cessac - scores of the older aristocracy,
       were involved, whilst literally hundreds of venal apothecaries, druggists, pseudo-alchemists,
       astrologers, quacks, warlocks, magicians, charlatans, who revolved round the ominous and terrible
       figure of Catherine La Voisin, professional seeress, fortune-teller, herbalist, beauty-specialist, were
       caught in the meshes of law. No less than eleven volumes of François Ravaison's huge work,
       Archives de la Bastille, are occupied with this evil crew and their doings, their sorceries and their
       poisonings.
             During the reign of Urban VIII, Maffeo Barberini, 1623-1644, there was a resounding scandal
       at Rome when it was discovered that “after many invocations of demons” Giacinto Contini,
       nephew of the Cardinal d'Ascoli, had been plotting with various accomplices to put an end to the
       Pope's life, and thus make way for the succession of his uncle to the Chair of Peter. Tommaso
       Orsolini of Recanate, moreover, after consulting with certain scryers and planetarians, readers of

file:///C|/!!witch/mm00b.html (2 of 6) [2002-01-20 12:04:39 PM]
Introduction of 1948 Edition

       the stars, was endeavouring to bribe the apothecary Carcurasio of Naples to furnish him with a
       quick poison, which might be mingled with the tonics and electuaries prescribed for the ailing
       Pontiff, (Ranke, History of the Popes, ed. 1901, Vol. III, pp. 375-6).
            To sum up, as is well observed by Professor Kittredge, who more than once emphasized “I
       have no belief in the black art or in the interference of demons in the daily life of mortals”, it
       makes no difference whether any of the charges were true or whether the whole affairs were
       hideous political chicanery. “Anyhow, it reveals the beliefs and the practices of the age.”
            Throughout the centuries witchcraft was universally held to be a dark and horrible reality; it
       was an ever-present, fearfully ominous menace, a thing most active, most perilous, most powerful
       and true. Some may consider these mysteries and cantrips and invocations, these sabbats and
       rendezvous, to have been merest mummery and pantomime, but there is no question that the
       psychological effect was incalculable, and harmful in the highest degree. It was, to use a modern
       phrase, “a war of nerves”. Jean Bodin, the famous juris-consult (1530-90) whom Montaigne
       acclaims to be the highest literary genius of his time, and who, as a leading member of the
       Parlement de Paris, presided over important trials, gives it as his opinion that there existed, no only
       in France, a complete organization of witches, immensely wealthy, of almost infinite potentialities,
       most cleverly captained, with centres and cells in every district, utilizing an espionage in ever land,
       with high-placed adherents at court, with humble servitors in the cottage. This organization,
       witchcraft, maintained a relentless and ruthless war against the prevailing order and settled state.
       No design was too treacherous, no betrayal was too cowardly, no blackmail too base and foul. The
       Masters lured their subjects with magnificent promises, they lured and deluded and victimized.
       Not the least dreaded and dreadful weapon in their armament was the ancient and secret
       knowledge of poisons (veneficia), of herbs healing and hurtful, a tradition and a lore which had
       been handed down from remotest antiquity.
            Little wonder, then, that later social historians, such as Charles Mackay and Lecky, both
       absolutely impartial and unprejudiced writers, sceptical even, devote many pages, the result of
       long and laborious research, to witchcraft. The did not believe in witchcraft as in any sense
       supernatural, although perhaps abnormal. But the centuries of which they were writing believed
       intensely in it, and it was their business as scholars to examine and explain the reasons for such
       belief. It was by no means all mediæval credulity and ignorance and superstition. MacKay and
       Lecky fully recognized this, as indeed they were in all honesty bound to do. They met with facts,
       hard facts, which could neither have been accidents nor motiveless, and these facts must be
       accounted for and elucidated. The profoundest thinkers, the acutest and most liberal minds of their
       day, such men as Cardan; Trithemius; the encylcopædic Delrio; Bishop Binsfeld; the learned
       physician, Caspar Peucer; Jean Bodin; Sir Edward Coke, “father of the English law”; Francis
       Bacon; Malebranche; Bayle; Glanvil; Sir Thomas Browne; Cotton Mather; all these, and scores
       besides, were convinced of the dark reality of witchcraft, of the witch organization. Such a
       consensus of opinion throughout the years cannot be lightly dismissed.
            The literature of the subject, discussing it in every detail, from every point of view, from
       every angle, is enormous. For example, such a Bibliography as that of Yve-Plessis, 1900, which
       deals only with leading French cases and purports to be no more than a supplement to the
       Bibliographies of Græsse, the Catalogues of the Abbé Sépher, Ouvaroff, the comte d'Ourches, the
       forty-six volumes of Dr. Hoefer, Shieble, Stanislas de Guaita, and many more, lists nearly 2,000
       items, and in a note we are warned that the work is very far from complete. The Manuel
       Bibliographique, 3 vols., 1912, of Albert L. Caillet, gives 11,648 items. Caillet has many
       omissions, some being treatises of the first importance. The library of witchcraft may without

file:///C|/!!witch/mm00b.html (3 of 6) [2002-01-20 12:04:39 PM]
Introduction of 1948 Edition

       exaggeration be said to be incalculable.
             It is hardly disputed that in the whole vast literature of witchcraft, the most prominent, the
       most important, the most authorative volume is the Malleus Maleficarum (The Witch Hammer) of
       Heinrich Kramer (Henricus Institoris) and James Sprenger. The date of the first edition of the
       Malleus cannot be fixed with absolute certainty, but the likeliest year is 1486. There were, at any
       rate, fourteen editions between 1487 and 1520, and at least sixteen editions between 1574 and
       1669. These were issued from the leading German, French and Italian presses. The latest reprint of
       the original text of the Malleus is to be found in the noble four volume collection of Treatises on
       Witchcraft, “sumptibus Claudii Bourgeat”, 4to., Lyons, 1669. There is a modern German
       translation by J.W.R. Schmidt, Der Hexehammer, 3 vols., Berlin, 1906; second edition, 1922-3.
       There is also an English translation with Introduction, Bibliography, and Notes by Montague
       Summers, published John Rodker, 1928.
             The Malleus acquired especial weight and dignity from the famous Bull of Pope Innocent
       VIII, Summis desiderantes affectibus of 9 December, 1484, in which the Pontiff, lamenting the
       power and prevalence of the witch organization, delegates Heinrich Kramer and James Sprenger as
       inquisitors of these pravities throughout Northern Germany, particularly in the provinces and
       dioceses of Mainz, Cologne, Tréves, Salzburg, and Bremen, granting both and either of them an
       exceptional authorization, and by Letters Apostolic requiring the Bishop of Strasburg, Albrecht
       von Bayern (1478-1506), not only to take steps to publish and proclaim the Bull, but further to
       afford Kramer and Sprenger every assistance, even calling in, if necessary, the help of the secular
       arm.
             This Bull, which was printed as the Preface to the Malleus, was thus, comments Dr. H.C. Lea,
       “spread broadcast over Europe”. In fact, “it fastened on European jurisprudence for nearly three
       centuries the duty of combating” the Society of Witches. The Malleus lay on the bench of every
       magistrate. It was the ultimate, irrefutable, unarguable authority. It was implicitly accepted not
       only by Catholic but by Protestant legislature. In fine, it is not too much to say that the Malleus
       Maleficarum is among the most important, wisest, and weightiest books of the world.
             It has been asked whether Kramer or Sprenger was principally responsible for the Malleus,
       but in the case of so close a collaboration any such inquiry seems singularly superflous and
       nugatory. With regard to instances of jointed authorship, unless there be some definite declaration
       on the part of one of the authors as to his particular share in a work, or unless there be some
       unusual and special circumstances bearing on the point, such perquisitions and analysis almost
       inevitably resolve themselves into a cloud of guess-work and bootless hazardry and vague perhaps.
       It becomes a game of literary blind-man's-bluff.
             Heinrich Kramer was born at Schlettstadt, a town of Lower Alsace, situated some twenty-six
       miles southwest of Strasburg. At an early age he entered the Order of S. Dominic, and so
       remarkable was his genius that whilst still a young man he was appointed to the position of Prior
       of the Dominican House at his native town, Schlettstadt. He was a Preacher-General and a Master
       of Sacred Theology. P.G. and S.T.M., two distinctions in the Dominican Order. At some date
       before 1474 he was appointed an Inquisitor for the Tyrol, Salzburg, Bohemia, and Moravia. His
       eloquence in the pulpit and tireless activity received due recognition at Roma, and for many years
       he was Spiritual Director of the great Dominican church at Salzburg, and the right-hand of the
       Archbishop of Salzburg, a munificent prelat who praises him highly in a letter which is still extant.
       In the late autumn or winter of 1485 Kramer had already drawn up a learned instruction or treatise
       on the subject of witchcraft. This circulated in manuscript, and is (almost in its entirety)


file:///C|/!!witch/mm00b.html (4 of 6) [2002-01-20 12:04:39 PM]
Introduction of 1948 Edition

       incorporated in the Malleus. By the Bull of Innocent VIII in December, 1484, he had already been
       associated with James Sprenger to make inquisition for and try witches and sorcerers. In 1495, the
       Master General of the Order, Fr. Joaquin de Torres, O.P., summoned Kramer to Venice in order
       that he might give public lectures, disputations which attracted crowded audiences, and which
       were honoured by the presence and patronage of the Patriarch of Venice. He also strenuously
       defended the Papal supremacy, confuting the De Monarchia of the Paduan jurisconsult, Antonio
       degli Roselli. At Venice he resided at the priory of Santi Giovanni e Paolo (S. Zanipolo). During
       the summer of 1497, he had returned to Germany, and was living at the convent of Rohr, near
       Regensburg. On 31 January, 1500, Alexander VI appointed him as Nuncio and Inquisitor of
       Bohemia and Moravia, in which provinces he was deputed and empowered to proceed against the
       Waldenses and Picards, as well as against the adherents of the witch-society. He wrote and
       preached with great fervour until the end. He died in Bohemia in 1505.
             His chief works, in addition to the Malleus, are: Several Discourses and Various Sermons
       upon the Most Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist; Nuremberg, 1496; A Tract Confuting the Errors
       of Master Antonio degli Roselli; Venice, 1499; and The Shield of Defence of the Holy Roman
       Church Against the Picards and Waldenses; an incunabulum, without date, but almost certainly
       1499-1500. Many learned authors quote and refer to these treatises in terms of highest praise.
             James Sprenger was born in Basel, 1436-8. He was admitted a novice in the Dominican house
       of this town in 1452. His extraordinary genius attracted immediate attention, and his rise to a
       responsible position was very rapid. According to Pierre Hélyot, the Fransican (1680-1716),
       Histoire des Ordres Religieux, III (1715), ch. XXVI, in 1389 Conrad of Prussia abolished certain
       relaxations and abuses which had crept into the Teutonic Province of the Order of S. Dominic, and
       restored the Primitive and Strict Obedience. He was closely followed by Sprenger, whose zealous
       reform was so warmly approved that in 1468 the General Chapter ordered him to lecture on the
       sentences of Peter Lombard at the University of Cologne, to which he was thus officially attached.
       A few years later he proceeded Master of Theology, and was elected Prior and Regent of Studies
       of the Cologne Convent, one of the most famous and frequented Houses of the Order. On 30 June,
       1480, he was elected Dean of the Faculty of Theology at the University. His lecture-room was
       thronged, and in the following year, at the Chapter held in Rome, the Master General of the Order,
       Fra Salvo Cusetta, appointed him Inquisitor Extraordinary for the Provinces of Mainz, Trèves, and
       Cologne. His activities were enormous, and demanded constant journeyings through the very
       extensive district to which he had been assigned. In 1488 he was elected Provincial of the whole
       German Province, an office of the first importance. It is said that his piety and his learning
       impressed all who came in contact with him. In 1495 he was residing at Cologne, and here he
       received a letter from Alexander VI praising his enthusiasm and his energy. He died rather
       suddenly, in the odour of sanctity - some chronicles call him “Beatus” - on 6 December, 1495, at
       Strasburg, where he is buried.
             Among Sprenger's other writings, excepting the Malleus, are The Paradoxes of John of
       Westphalia Refuted, Mainz, 1479, a closely argued treatise; and The Institution and Approbation of
       the Confraternity of the Most Holy Rosary, which was first erected at Cologne on 8 September in
       the year 1475, Cologne, 1475. Sprenger may well be called the “Apostle of the Rosary”. None
       more fervent than he in spreading this Dominican elevation. His zeal enrolled thousands, including
       the Emperor Frederick III, in the Confraternity of the Most Holy Rosary, which was enriched with
       many indulgences by a Bull of Sixtus IV. It has been observed that the writings of Father James
       Sprenger on the Rosary are well approved by many learned men, Pontiffs, Saints and Theologians


file:///C|/!!witch/mm00b.html (5 of 6) [2002-01-20 12:04:39 PM]
Introduction of 1948 Edition

       alike. There can be no doubt that Sprenger was a mystic of the highest order, a man of most saintly
       life.
             The Dominican chroniclers, such as Quétif and Echard, number Kramer and Sprenger among
       the glories and heroes of their Order.
             Certain it is that the Malleus Maleficarum is the most solid, the most important work in the
       whole vast library of witchcraft. One turns to it again and again with edification and interest: From
       the point of psychology, from the point of jurisprudence, from the point of history, it is supreme. It
       has hardly too much to say that later writers, great as they are, have done little more than draw
       from the seemingly inexhaustible wells of wisdom which the two Dominicans, Heinrich Kramer
       and James Sprenger, have given us in the Malleus Maleficarum.
             What is most surprising is the modernity of the book. There is hardly a problem, a complex, a
       difficulty, which they have not foreseen, and discussed, and resolved.
             Here are cases which occur in the law-courts to-day, set out with the greatest clarity, argued
       with unflinching logic, and judged with scrupulous impartiality.
             It is a work which must irresistibly capture the attention of all mean who think, all who see,
       or are endeavouring to see, the ultimate reality beyond the accidents of matter, time and space.
             The Malleus Maleficarum is one of the world's few books written sub specie aeternitatis.



              Montague Summers.
              7 October, 1946.
                In Festo SS. Rosarii.

NOTA - To Dr. H.J. Norma I wish to express my grateful thanks for his kindness in having read through the proofs of the
 Malleus Maleficarum. Those who realize the labour and sacrifice of time such a task demands will best appreciate the
                                     value of such generous assistance. - M.S.


                                                  Main Index


                                         “The Malleus Maleficarum” was transcribed by
                                              Wicasta Lovelace and Christie Rice.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/mm00b.html (6 of 6) [2002-01-20 12:04:39 PM]
Introduction of 1928 Edition - P.1


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM

                         INTRODUCTION TO 1928 EDITION
             It has been recognized even from the very earliest times, during the first gropings towards the
       essential conveniences of social decency and social order, that witchcraft is an evil thing, an
       enemy to light, an ally of the powers of darkness, disruption, and decay. Sometimes, no doubt,
       primitive communities were obliged to tolerate the witch and her works owing to fear; in other
       words, witchcraft was a kind of blackmail; but directly Cities were able to to co-ordinate, and it
       became possible for Society to protect itself, precautions were taken and safeguards were instituted
       against this curse, this bane whose object seemed to blight all that was fair, all that was just and
       good, and that was well-appointed and honourable, in a word, whose aim proved to be set up on
       high the red standard of revolution; to overwhelm religion, existing order, and the comeliness of
       life in an abyss of anarchy, nihilism, and despair. In his great treatise De Ciutate Dei S. Augustine
       set forth the theory, or rather the living fact, of the two Cities, the City of God, and the opposing
       stronghold of all that is not for God, that is to say, of all that is against Him.
             This seems to be a natural truth which the inspired Doctor has so eloquently demonstrated in
       his mighty pages, and even before the era of Christianity men recognized the verity, and nations
       who had never heard the Divine command put into practice the obligation of the Mosaic maxim:
       Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live. (Vulgate: Maleficos non patieris uiuere. Douay: Wizards thou
       shalt not suffer to live. Exodus, xxii, 18.)
             It is true that both in the Greek and in the earlier Roman cults, worships often directly derived
       from secret and sombre sources, ancient gods, or rather demons, had their awful superstitions and
       their horrid rites, powers whom men dreaded but out of very terror placated; fanes men loathed but
       within whose shadowed portals they bent and bowed the knee perforce in trembling fear. Such
       deities were the Thracian Bendis, whose manifestation was heralded by the howling of her fierce
       black hounds, and Hecate the terrible “QUeen of the realm of ghosts,” as Euripides calls her, and
       the vampire Mormo and the dark Summanus who at midnight hurled loud thunderbolts and
       launched the deadly levin through the starless sky. Pliny tells us that the worship of this mysterious
       deity lasted long, and dogs with their puppies were sacrificed to him with atrocious cruelty, but S.
       Augustine says that in his day “one could scarce find one within a while, that had heard, nay more,
       that had read so much as the name of Summanus” (De Ciuitate Dei, iv, 23). Nevertheless there is
       only too much reason to believe that this devil-god had his votaries, although his liturgy was
       driven underground and his supplicants were obliged to assemble in remote and secret places.
       Towards the end of the fifth century, the Carthaginian Martianus Capella boldly declares that
       Summanus is none other than the lord of Hell, and he was writing, it may be remembered, only a
       few years before the birth of S. Benedict; some think that he was still alive when the Father of All
       Monks was born.
             Although in Greek States the prosecution of witches was rare, in large measure owing to the
       dread they inspired, yet cases were not unknown, for Theoris, a woman of Lemnos, who is

file:///C|/!!witch/mm00c.html (1 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:40 PM]
Introduction of 1928 Edition - P.1

       denounced by Demosthenes, was publicly tried at Athens and burned for her necromancy. It is
       perhaps not impertinent to observe that many strange legends attached to the island of Lemnos,
       which is situated in the Aegaean Sea, nearly midway between Mt. Athos and the Hellespoint. It is
       one of the largest of the group, having an area of some 147 square miles. Lemnos was sacred to
       Hephaestus, who is said to have fallen here when hurled by Zeus from Olympus. The workshops
       of the Smith-God in ancient legend were supposed to be on the island, although recent geologists
       deny that this area was ever volcanic, and the fires which are spoken of as issuing from it must be
       considered gaseous. Later the officinae of Hephaestus were placed in Sicily and the Lipari Islands,
       particularly Hiera.
            The worship of Hephaestus in later days seems to have degenerated and to have been
       identified with some of the secret cults of the evil powers. This was probably due to his connexion
       with fire and also to his extreme ugliness, for he was frequently represented as a swarthy man of
       grim and forbidding aspect. It should further be noted that the old Italian deity Volcanus, with
       whom he was to be identified, is the god of destructive fire - fire considered in its rage and terror,
       as contrasted with fire which is a comfort to the human race, the kindly blaze on the hearth,
       domestic fire, presided over by the gracious lady Vesta. It is impossible not to think of the fall of
       Lucifer when one considers the legend of Hephaestus. Our Lord replied, when the disciples
       reported: Domine, etiam daemonia subiiciuntur nobis in nomine tuo (Lord, the devils also are
       subject to us in Thy Name), Uidebam Satanam sicut fulgur de coelo cadentem (I saw Satan like
       lightning falling from Heaven); and Isaias says: “Quomodo cecidisti de coelo, Lucifer, qui mane
       oriebaris? Corruisti in terram qui uulnerabas gentes?” (How art thou fallen from Heaven, O
       Lucifer, who didst rise in the morning? How art thou fallen to the earth, that didst wound the
       nations?) Milton also has the following poetic allusion:
                Nor was his name unheard or unador'd
                In Ancient Greece; and in Ausonian land
                Men called him Mulciber; and how he fell
                From Heav'n, they fabl'd, thrown by angry Jove
                Sheer o'er the Chrystal Battlements: from Morn
                To Noon he fell, from Noon to dewy Eve,
                A Summers day; and with the setting Sun
                Dropt from the Zenith like a falling Star,
                On Lemnos th' Ægæan Ile: thus they relate,
                Erring; for he with his rebellious rout
                Fell long before; nor aught avail'd him now
                To have built in Heav'n high Towrs; nor did he scape
                By all his Engins, but was headlong sent
                With his industrious crew to build in hell.

            Hephaestus, especially in later days, is represented with one leg shortened to denote his
       lameness; and throughout the Middle Ages it was popularly believed that his cloven hoof was the
       one feature which the devil was unable to disguise. In this connexion with Loki, the Vulcan of
       Northern Europe, will be readily remembered. Frederick Hall writes: “Hephaestos, Vulcan and
       Loki, each lame from some deformity of foot, in time joined natures with the Pans and satyrs of
       the upper world; the lame sooty blacksmith donned their goatlike extremities of cloven hoofs, tail
       and horns; and the black dwarfs became uncouth ministers of this sooty, black, found fiend. If ever
       mortal man accepted the services of these cunning metalworkers, it was for some sinister purpose,
       and at a fearful price - no less than that of the soul itself, bartered away in a contract of blood, the


file:///C|/!!witch/mm00c.html (2 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:40 PM]
Introduction of 1928 Edition - P.1

       emblem of life and the colour of fire.”
            There were also dark histories of murder and blood connected with Lemnos. When the
       Argonauts landed here they found it inhabited only by Amazons, who, having murdered all their
       husbands, had chosen as their queen Hypsipyle, daughter of Thoas, whom she secretly preserved
       alive. When this was discovered the unfortunate woman was compelled to leave the island, and
       being subsequently captured by pirates she was sold to Lycurgus, king of the sacred groves that
       surrounded the temple of Zeus Nemeus in a remote Argive valley. Hypsipyle here became the
       nurse of the mysterious child Archemorus, the Forerunner of Death, who was bitten by a magic
       serpent and vanished, portending the doom of the Seven who went against Thebes.
            At a later time the Pelasgians are said to have massacred the inhabitants of Lemnos, and to
       have settled there with some Athenian maidens they had carried off from Attica. Afterwards these
       savages murdered both their wives and their children. In consequence of such atrocities Lemnian
       deeds became proverbial in Greek for horrors and sorceries. It is curious to remark that a certain
       red clay (terra Lemnia) found on the island was, as Pliny tells us, employed as a remedy for
       wounds, and especially the bite of a snake. This latter may have some obscure connexion with the
       story of Archemorus. In any case enough has been said to show that this island was considered a
       land of mystery and ancient terrors, a fitting origin for the witch Theoris.
            In Rome black magic was punished as a capital offence by the Law of the Twelve Tables,
       which are to be assigned to the fifth century B.C., and, as Livy records, from time to time
       Draconian statutes were directed against those who attempted to blight crops and vineyards or to
       spread rinderpest amongst flocks and cattle. None the less it is evident from many Latin authors
       and from the historians that Rome swarmed with occultists and diviners, many of whom in spite of
       the Lex Cornelia almost openly traded in poisons, and not infrequently in assassination to boot.
       Sometimes, as in the Middle Ages, a circumstance of which the Malleus Maleficarum most
       particularly complains, the sorcerers were protected by men of wealth and high estate. This was
       especially the case in the terrible days of Marius and of Catiline, and during the extreme decadence
       of the latest Caesars. Yet, paradoxical as it may appear, such emperors as Augustus, Tiberius, and
       Septimius Severus, whilst banishing from their realms all seers and necromancers, and putting
       them to death, in private entertained astrologers and wizards among their retinue, consulting their
       art upon each important occasion, and often even in the everyday and ordinary affairs of life.
            Nevertheless it must be noted that all the while normal legislation utterly condemned
       witchcraft and its works, whilst the laws were not merely carried out to their very letter, but
       reinforced by such emperors as Claudius, Vitelius, and Vespasian.
            These prosecutions are very significant, and I have insisted upon them in some detail, as I
       wish to emphasize that stern and constant official opposition to witchcraft, and the prohibition
       under severest penalties, the sentence of death itself, of any practice or pursuit of these dangerous
       and irreligious arts, was demonstrably not a product of Christianity, but had long and necessarily
       been employed in the heathen world and among pagan peoples and among polytheistic societies.
       Moreover, there are even yet savage communities who visit witchcraft with death.
            Accordingly, if we cite the Vincentian cannon, quod semper, quod ubique, quod ab omnibus,
       we might surely say that from the earliest dawn of civilization witchcraft has been prohibited,
       hated, and feared.
            At the time of the triumph of Christianity a decadent Empire in the last throes of paganism
       was corroded by every kind of superstition and occult art, from the use of petty and harmless
       sympathetic charms of healing to the darkest crimes of goetic ceremonial. Spells, scrying,


file:///C|/!!witch/mm00c.html (3 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:40 PM]
Introduction of 1928 Edition - P.1

       conjurations, evokings of the dead were never more fashionable and never more keenly explored
       by every class and ever order, from the divine Caesar in his palace to the losel peasant in his
       humble shed. If the disease is universal, the medicine must be sharp. It was very difficult, when the
       infection of crime was so general, to discriminate and draw the line, to take into consideration
       relative differences and nice gradations. So much that was heathen, so much that was bad, was
       mixed up with what might seem to be simple credulity, and the harmless folk-customs of some
       grandam tradition and immemorial usage, a song or a country dance mayhap, innocent enough on
       the surface, and even pleasing, so often were but the cloak and the mask for something devilish
       and obscene, that the Church deemed it necessary to forbid and proscribe the whole superstition
       even when it manifested itself in modest fashion and seemed guileless, innoxious, and of no
       account. Thus, for example, to make a wind blow or to drop in a world-wide fantasy which appears
       harmless enough. The Esthonians when they wish to raise a wind strike a knife into a house-beam
       in the direction from which they desire the wind to blow, while at the same time they croon an
       old-time canzonet. The underlying idea is that the gentle wind will not let any innocent thing, not
       even a beam, suffer without coming swiftly and breathing softly thereon to assuage the pain. But at
       Constantinople, in the reign of Constantine, a warlock named Sopater was put to death on a charge
       of binding the winds by magic, which he had at any rate esssayed to do, whether or no the fact that
       the cornships of Egypt and Syria were detained on their voyage by calms and headwinds was
       actually due to his interference. The city was nearly starved, and the Byzantine mob, clamouring
       for bread, was ready to break out into the wildest excesses. In Scotland witches used to raise the
       wind by dipping the corner of a plaid in water and beating it thrice upon a stone, crooning the
       following words:
                I knok this rage upone this stane
                To raise the wind in the divellis name,
                It sall not lye till I please againe.

       It will readily be remembered that one of the chief charges brought against the coven of North
       Berwick witches during the famous trial of 1590 was that they performed incantations to raise a
       tempest which might wreck the fleet that was escorting James VI when he brought his queen,
       Anne of Denmark, from her native country to Scotland. So we see that a superstition which in a
       little fishing village, when some mother was calling a fair wind for her son, or some lass whistled
       for a gentle breeze to fill the sails of her sweetheart's trawler, was simple and kindly enough, might
       yet become dangerous and deadly at least in intent when launched be malevolent witches who had
       the will if not the power to destroy, and who if this means failed would hasten to employ other
       methods that should prove far more resourceful in their means and efficacious in their results.
                                                                  Page 1 of 8


                                     Introduction to 1928 Edition continued . . .

                                                   Main Index


                                          “The Malleus Maleficarum” was transcribed by


file:///C|/!!witch/mm00c.html (4 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:40 PM]
Introduction of 1928 Edition - P.1

                                                Wicasta Lovelace and Christie Rice.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/mm00c.html (5 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:40 PM]
Notes

           The influence of this Saint over the dark powers was very remarkable, and he is especially
        venerated as “effugator daemonu.” The Medal of S. Benedict has been found to be extremely
        potent against all evil spells. During a trial for witchcraft in 1647 at Nattenberg near the Abbey of
        Metten in Bavaria, the sorcerers acknowledged that their attempts against the monks were foiled
        by the holy Medal. The possessed boys of Illfurt (Alsace), 1864-69, exhibited the utmost dread of S.
        Benedict's Medal.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192801.html [2002-01-20 12:04:40 PM]
Notes

           Homer, “Iliad,” I, 590, sqq. Cf. Ovid, “Fasti,” III, 82: “Uolcanum tellus Hypsipylea colit.”
        Upon which Paulus glosses: “Hoc est, Lemnos insula, at Hypsipyle Thoantis filia quae in ea
        regnauit.”




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192802.html [2002-01-20 12:04:41 PM]
Notes

            “Aeneid,” VIII, 416-422:
        Insula Sicanium iuxta latus Aeoliamque
        erigitur Liparen, fumantibus ardua saxis,
        quam subter specus et Cyclopum exesa caminis
        antra Aetnaea tonant, ualidique incudubus ictus
        auditi referunt gemitus, striduntque cauernis
        stricturae Chalybum et fornacibus ignis anhelat,
        Uolcani domus, et Uolcania nomine tellus.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192803.html [2002-01-20 12:04:41 PM]
Notes

           S. Luke, x, 17, 18.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192804.html [2002-01-20 12:04:41 PM]
Notes

           Isaias, xiv, 12.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192805.html [2002-01-20 12:04:41 PM]
Notes

           “Paradise Lost,” I, 738-51.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192806.html [2002-01-20 12:04:41 PM]
Notes

           “The Pedigree of the Devil,” London, 1883, pp. 178-9.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192807.html [2002-01-20 12:04:42 PM]
Notes

           Aeschylus, “Choephoroe,” 631-38.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192808.html [2002-01-20 12:04:42 PM]
Notes

           IV, 50; XXV, 1; XXXIX, 16.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192809.html [2002-01-20 12:04:42 PM]
Notes

           Eunapius, “Uitae sophistarum”: Aedesius (ed. Didot, p. 463).




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192810.html [2002-01-20 12:04:42 PM]
Notes

           “The Darker Superstitions of Scotland”: T. G. Dalyell (p. 248).




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192811.html [2002-01-20 12:04:43 PM]
Introduction of 1928 Edition - P.2


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM

                         INTRODUCTION TO 1928 EDITION
             Accordingly, during the years 319-21 a number of laws were passed which penalized and
       punished the craft of magic with the utmost severity. A pagan diviner or haruspex could only
       follow his vocation under very definite restrictions. He was not allowed to be an intimate visitor at
       the house of any citizen, for friendship with men of this kind must be avoided. “The haruspex who
       frequents the houses of others shall die at the stake,” such is the tenor of the code. It is hardly an
       exaggeration to say that almost every year saw a more rigid application of the laws; although even
       as to-day, when fortune-telling and peering into the future are forbidden by the Statute-Book,
       diviners and mediums abound, so then in spite of every prohibition astrologers, clairvoyants, and
       palmists had an enormous clientèle of rich and poor alike. However, under Valens, owing to his
       discovery of the damning fact that certain prominent courtiers had endeavoured by means ot
       table-rapping to ascertain who should be his successor upon the throne, in the year 367 a regular
       crusade, which in its details recalls the heyday of Master Matthew Hopkins, was instituted against
       the whole race of magicians, soothsayers, mathematici, and theurgists, which perhaps was the first
       general prosecution during the Christian era. Large numbers of persons, including no doubt many
       innocent as well as guilty, were put to death, and a veritable panic swept through the Eastern
       world.
             The early legal codes of most European nations contain laws directed against witchcraft.
       Thus, for example, the oldest document of Frankish legislation, the Salic Law (Lex salica), which
       was reduced to a written form and promulgated under Clovis, who died 27 November, 511, mulcts
       (sic) those who practise magic with various fines, especially when it could be proven that the
       accused launched a deadly curse, or had tied the Witch's Knot. This latter charm was usually a
       long cord tightly tied up in elaborate loops, among whose reticulations it was customary to insert
       the feathers of a black hen, a raven, or some other bird which had, or was presumed to have, no
       speck of white. This is one of the oldest instruments of witchcraft and is known in all countries and
       among all nations. It was put to various uses. The wizards of Finland, when they sold wind in the
       three knots of a rope. If the first knot were undone a gentle breeze sprang up; if the second, it blew
       a mackerel gale; if the third, a hurricane. But the Witch's Ladder, as it was often known, could be
       used with far more baleful effects. The knots were tied with certain horrid maledictions, and then
       the cord was hidden away in some secret place, and unless it were found and the strands released
       the person at whom the curse was directed would pine and die. This charm continually occurs
       during the trials. Thus in the celebrated Island-Magee case, March 1711, when a coven of witches
       was discovered, it was remarked that an apron belonging to Mary Dunbar, a visitor at the house of
       the afflicted persons, had been abstracted. Miss Dunbar was suddenly seized with fits and
       convulsions, and sickened almost to death. After most diligent search the missing garment was
       found carefully hidden away and covered over, and a curious string which had nine knots in it had
       been so tied up with the folds of the linen that it was beyond anything difficult to separate them

file:///C|/!!witch/mm00c2.html (1 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:43 PM]
Introduction of 1928 Edition - P.2

       and loosen the ligatures. In 1886 in the old belfry of a village church in England there were
       accidentally discovered, pushed away in a dark corner, several yards of incle braided with
       elaborate care and having a number of black feathers thrust through the strands. It is said that for a
       long while considerable wonder was caused as to what it might be, but when it was exhibited and
       became known, one of the local grandmothers recognized it was a Witch's Ladder, and, what is
       extremely significant, when it was engraved in the Folk Lore Journal an old Italian woman to
       whom the picture was shown immediately identified it as la ghirlanda delle streghe.
             The laws of the Visigoths, which were to some extent founded upon the Roman law, punished
       witches who had killed any person by their spells with death; whilst long-continued and obstinate
       witchcraft, if fully proven, was visited with such severe sentences as slavery for life. In 578, when
       a son of Queen Fredegonde died, a number of witches who were accused of having contrived the
       destruction of the Prince were executed. It has been said in these matters that the ecclesiastical law
       was tolerant, since for the most part it contented itself with a sentence of excommunication. But
       those who consider this spiritual outlawry lenient certainly do not appreciate what such a doom
       entailed. Moreover, after a man had been condemned to death by the civil courts it would have
       been somewhat superfluous to have repeated the same sentence, and beyond the exercise of her
       spiritual weapons, what else was there left for the Church to do?
             In 814, Louis le Pieux upon his accession to the throne began to take very active measures
       against all sorcerers and necromancers, and it was owing to his influence and authority that the
       Council of Paris in 829 appealed to the secular courts to carry out any such sentences as the
       Bishops might pronounce. The consequence was that from this time forward the penalty of
       witchcraft was death, and there is evidence that if the constituted authority, either ecclesiastical or
       civil, seemed to slacken in their efforts the populace took the law into their own hands with far
       more fearful results.
             In England the early Penitentials are greatly concerned with the repression of pagan
       ceremonies, which under the cover of Christian festivities were very largely practised at Christmas
       and on New Year's Day. These rites were closely connected with witchcraft, and especially do S.
       Theodore, S. Aldhelm, Ecgberht of York, and other prelates prohibit the masquerade as a horned
       animal, a stag, or a bull, which S. Caesarius of Arles had denounced as a “foul tradition,” an “evil
       custom,” a “most heinous abomination.” These and even stronger expressions would not be used
       unless some very dark and guilty secrets had been concealed beneath this mumming, which,
       however foolish, might perhaps have been thought to be nothing worse, so that to be so roundly
       denounced as devilish and demoniacal they must certainly have had some very grim signification
       which did not appear upon the surface. The laws of King Athelstan (924-40), corresponsive with
       the early French laws, punished any person casting a spell which resulted in death by extracting
       the extreme penalty. During the eleventh and twelfth centuries there are few cases of witchcraft in
       England, and such accusations as were made appeared to have been brought before the
       ecclesiastical court. It may be remarked, however, that among the laws attributed to King Kenneth
       I of Scotland, who ruled from 844 to 860, and under whom the Scots of Dalriada and the Pictish
       peoples may be said to have been united in one kingdom, is an important statute which enacts that
       all sorcerers and witches, and such as invoke spirits, “and use to seek upon them for helpe, let
       them be burned to death.” Even then this was obviously no new penalty, but the statutory
       confirmation of a long-established punishment. So the witches of Forres who attempted the life of
       King Duffus in the year 968 by the old bane of slowly melting a wax image, when discovered,
       were according to the law burned at the stake.
             The conversion of Germany to Christianity was late and very slow, for as late as the eighth

file:///C|/!!witch/mm00c2.html (2 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:43 PM]
Introduction of 1928 Edition - P.2

       century, in spite of the heroic efforts of S. Columbanus, S. Fridolin, S. Gall, S. Rupert, S.
       Willibrod, the great S. Boniface, and many others, in spite of the headway that had been made,
       various districts were always relapsing into a primitive and savage heathenism. For example, it is
       probably true to say that the Prussian tribles were not stable in their conversion until the beginning
       of the thirteenth century, when Bishop Albrecht reclaimed the people by a crusade. However,
       throughout the eleventh and the twelfth centuries there are continual instances of persons who had
       practised witchcraft being put to death, and the Emperor Frederick II, in spite of the fact that he
       was continually quarrelling with the Papacy and utterly indifferent to any religious obligation -
       indeed it has been said that he was “a Christian ruler only in name,” and “throughout his reign he
       remained virtually a Moslem free-thinker” - declared that a law which he had enacted for
       Lombardy should have force throughout the whole of his dominions. “Henceforth,” Vacandard
       remarks, “all uncertainty was at an end. The legal punishment for heresy throughout the empire
       was death at the stake.” It must be borne in mind that witchcraft and heresy were almost
       inextricably commingled. It is quite plain that such a man as Frederick, whose whole philosophy
       was entirely Oriental; who was always accompanied by a retinue of Arabian ministers, courtiers,
       and officers; who was perhaps not without reason suspected of being a complete agnostic, recked
       little whether heresy and witchcraft might be offences against the Church or not, but he was
       sufficiently shrewd to see that they gravely threatened the well-being of the State, imperilling the
       maintenance of civilization and the foundations of society.
              This brief summary of early laws and ancient ordinances has been given in order to show that
       the punishment of witchcraft certainly did not originate in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries,
       and most assuredly was not primarily the concern of the Inquisition. In fact, curiously enough,
       Bernard Gui, the famous Inquisitor of Toulouse, laid down in his Practica Inquisitionis that
       sorcery itself did not fall within the cognizance of the Holy Office, and in every case, unless there
       were other circumstances of which his tribunal was bound to take notice when witches came
       before him, he simply passed them on to the episcopal courts.
              It may be well here very briefly to consider the somewhat complicated history of the
       establishment of the Inquisition, which was, it must be remembered, the result of the tendencies
       and growth of many years, by no mens a judicial curia with cut-and-dried laws and a compete
       procedure suddenly called into being by one stroke of a Papal pen. In the first place, S. Dominic
       was in no sense the founder of the Inquisition. Certainly during the crusade in Languedoc he was
       present, reviving religion and reconciling the lapsed, but he was doing no more than S. Paul or any
       of the Apostles would have done. The work of S. Dominic was preaching and the organization of
       his new Order, which received Papal confirmation from Honorius III, and was approved in the
       Bull Religiosam uitam, 22 December, 1216. S. Dominic died 6 August, 1221, and even if we take
       the word in a very broad sense, the first Dominican Inquisitor seems to have been Alberic, who in
       November, 1232, was travelling through Lombardy with the official title of “Inquisitor hereticae
       prauitatis.” The whole question of the episcopal Inquisitors, who were really the local bishop, his
       archdeacons, and his diocesan court, and their exact relationship with the travelling Inquisitors,
       who were mainly drawn from the two Orders of friars, the Franciscan and the Dominican, is
       extremely nice and complicated; whilst the gradual effacement of the episcopal courts with regard
       to certain matters and the consequent prominence of the Holy Office were circumstances and
       conditions which realized themselves slowly enough in all countries, and almost imperceptibly in
       some districts, as necessity required, without any sudden break or sweeping changes. In fact we
       find that the Franciscan or Dominican Inquisitor simply sat as an assessor in the episcopal court so


file:///C|/!!witch/mm00c2.html (3 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:43 PM]
Introduction of 1928 Edition - P.2

       that he could be consulted upon certain technicalities and deliver sentence conjointly with the
       Bishop if these matters were involved. Thus at the trial of Gilles de Rais in October, 1440, at
       Nantes, the Bishop of Nantes presided over the court with the bishops of Le Mans, Saint-Brieuc,
       and Saint-Lo as his coadjutors, whilst Pierre de l’Hospital, Chencellor of Brittany, watched the
       case on behalf of the civil authorities, and Frère Jean Blouin was present as the delegate of the
       Holy Inquisition for the city and district of Nantes. Owing to the multiplicity of the crimes, which
       were proven and clearly confessed in accordance with legal requirements, it was necessary to
       pronounce two sentences. The first sentence was passed by the Bishop of Nantes conjointly with
       the Inquisitor. By them Gilles de Rais was declared guilty of Satanism, sorcery, and apostasy, and
       there and then handed over to the civil arm to receive the punishment due to such offences. The
       second sentence, pronounced by the Bishop alone, declared the prisoner convicted of sodomy,
       sacrilege, and violation of ecclesiastical rights. The ban of excommunication was lifted since the
       accused had made a clean breast of his crimes and desired to be reconciled, but he was handed
       over to the secular court, who sentenced him to death, on multiplied charges of murder as well as
       on account of the aforesaid offences.
             It must be continually borne in mind also, and this is a fact which is very often slurred over
       and forgotten, that the heresies of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, to cope with which the
       tribunal of the Inquisition was primarily organized and regularized, were by no means mere
       theoretical speculations, which, however erroneous and dangerous in the fields of thought,
       practically and in action would have been arid and utterly unfruitful. To-day the word “heresy”
       seems to be as obsolete and as redolent of a Wardour-street vocabulary as if one were to talk of a
       game of cards at Crimp or Incertain, and to any save a dusty mediaevalist it would appear to be an
       antiquarian term. It was far other in the twelfth century; the wild fanatics who fostered the most
       subversive and abominable ideas aimed to put these into actual practice, to establish communities
       and to remodel whole territories according to the programme which they had so carefully
       considered in every detail with a view to obtaining and enforcing their own ends and their own
       interests. The heretics were just as resolute and just as practical, that is to say, just as determined to
       bring about the domination of their absolutism as is any revolutionary of to-day. The aim and
       objects of their leaders, Tanchelin, Everwacher, the Jew Manasses, Peter Waldo, Pierre Autier,
       Peter of Bruys, Arnold of Brescia, and the rest, were exactly those of Lenin, Trotsky, Zinoviev,
       and their fellows. There were, of course, minor differences and divergences in their tenets, that is
       to say, some had sufficient cunning to conceal and even to deny the extremer views which other
       were bold enough or mad enough more openly to proclaim. But just below the trappings, a little
       way beneath the surface, their motives, their methods, their intentions, the goal to which they
       pressed, were all the same. Their objects may be summed up as the abolition of monarchy, the
       abolition of private property and of inheritance, the abolition of marriage, the abolition of order,
       the total abolition of all religion. It was against this that the Inquisition had to fight, and who can
       be surprised if, when faced with so vast a conspiracy, the methods employed by the Holy Office
       may not seem - if the terrible conditions are conveniently forgotten - a little drastic, a little severe?
       There can be no doubt that had this most excellent tribunal continued to enjoy its full prerogative
       and the full exercise of its salutary powers, the world at large would be in a far happier and far
       more orderly position to-day. Historians may point out diversities and dissimilarities between the
       teaching of the Waldenses, the Albigenses, the Henricans, the Poor Men of Lyons, the Cathari, the
       Vaudois, the Bogomiles, and the Manichees, but they were in reality branches and variants of the
       same dark fraternity, just as the Third International, the Anarchists, the Nihilists, and the
       Bolsheviks are in every sense, save the mere label, entirely identical.

file:///C|/!!witch/mm00c2.html (4 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:43 PM]
Introduction of 1928 Edition - P.2

                                                                   Page 2 of 8


                                     Introduction to 1928 Edition continued . . .

                                                  Main Index


                                         “The Malleus Maleficarum” was transcribed by
                                              Wicasta Lovelace and Christie Rice.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/mm00c2.html (5 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:43 PM]
Notes

           “Codex Theodosianus,” Lib, IX, tit. xvi, 1, 1.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192812.html [2002-01-20 12:04:44 PM]
Notes

            Olaus Magnus, “Gentium septentr. hist.,” III, 15. A Stornoway woman sold a mariner such a
        cord with three knots. “Our Highland Folklore Heritage,” Alexander Polson, Inverness, 1926, p.
        73.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192813.html [2002-01-20 12:04:44 PM]
Notes

           “Practica Inquisitionis haereticae prauitatis.” Document publié pour la première fois par le
        chanoine C. Douais. Paris, 4to, 1886.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192814.html [2002-01-20 12:04:44 PM]
Introduction of 1928 Edition - P.3


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM

                         INTRODUCTION TO 1928 EDITION
             In fact heresy was one huge revolutionary body, exploiting its forces through a hundred
       different channels and having as its object chaos and corruption. The question may be asked -
       What was their ultimate aim in wishing to destroy civilization? What did they hope to gain by it?
       Precisely the same queries have been put and are put to-day with regard to these political parties.
       There is an apparent absence of motive in this seemingly aimless campaign of destruction to
       extermination carried on by the Bolsheviks in Russia, which has led many people to inquire what
       the objective can possibly be. So unbridled are the passions, so general the demolition, so terrible
       the havoc, that hard-headed individuals argue that so complete a chaos and such revolting outrages
       could only be affected by persons who were enthusiasts in their own cause and who had some very
       definite aims thus positively to pursue. The energizing forces of this fanaticism, this fervent zeal,
       do not seem to be any more apparent than the end, hence more than one person has hesitated to
       accept accounts so alarming of massacres and carnage, or wholesale imprisonments, tortures, and
       persecutions, and has begun to suspect that the situation may be grossly exaggerated in the
       overcharged reports of enemies and the highly-coloured gossip of scare-mongers. Nay, more,
       partisans have visited the country and returned with glowing tales of a new Utopia. It cannot be
       denied that all this is a very clever game. It is generally accepted that from very policy neither an
       individual nor a junto or confederacy will act even occasionally, much less continually and
       consistently, in a most bloody and tyrannical way, without some very well-arranged programme is
       being thus carried out and determinate aim ensued, conditions and object which in the present case
       it seems extremely difficult to guess at and divine unless we are to attribute the revolution to
       causes the modern mind is apt to dismiss with impatience and intolerance.
             Nearly a century and a half ago Anacharsis Clootz, “the personal enemy of Jesus Christ” as
       he openly declared himself, was vociferating “God is Evil,” “To me then Lucifer, Satan! whoever
       you may be, the demon that the faith of my fathers opposed to God and the Church.” This is the
       credo of the witch.
             Although it may not be generally recognized, upon a close investigation it seems plain that
       the witches were a vast political movement, an organized society which was anti-social and
       anarchichal, a world-wide plot against civilization. Naturally, although the Masters were often
       individuals of high rank and deep learning, that rank and file of the society, that is to say, those
       who for the most part fell into the hands of justice, were recruited from the least educated classes,
       the ignorant and the poor. As one might suppose, many of the branches or covens in remoter
       districts knew nothing and perhaps could have understood nothing of the enormous system.
       Nevertheless, as small cogs in a very small wheel, it might be, they were carrying on the work and
       actively helping to spread the infection. It is an extremely significant fact that the last regularly
       official trial and execution for witchcraft in Western Europe was that of Anna Goeldi, who was


file:///C|/!!witch/mm00c3.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:04:45 PM]
Introduction of 1928 Edition - P.3

       hanged at Glaris in Switzerland, 17 June, 1782. Seven years before, in 1775, the villian Adam
       Weishaupt, who has been truly described by Louis Blac as “the profoundest conspirator that has
       ever existed,” formed his “terrible and formidable sect,” the Illuminati. The code of this
       mysterious movement lays down: “it is also necessary to gain the common people (das gemeine
       Volk) to our Order. The great means to that end is influence in the schools.” This is exactly the
       method of the organizations of witches, and again and again do writers lament and bewail the
       endless activities of this sect amongst the young people and even the children of the district. So in
       the prosecutions at Würzburg we find that there were condemned boys of ten and eleven, two choir
       boys aged twelve, “a boy of twelve years old in one of the lower forms of the school,” “the two
       young sons of the Prince's cook, the eldest fourteen, the younger twelve years old,” several pages
       and seminarists, as well as a number of young girls, amongst whom “a child of nine or ten years
       old and her little sister” were involved.
             The political operations of the witches in many lands were at their trials exposed time after
       time, and these activities are often discernible even when they did not so publicly and prominently
       come to light. A very few cases, to which we must make but brief and inadequate reference, will
       stand for many. In England in the year 1324 no less than twenty-seven defendants were tried at the
       King's Bench for plotting against and endeavouring to kill Edward II, together with many
       prominent courtiers and officials, by the practice of magical arts. A number of wealthy citizens of
       Coventry had hired a famous “nigromauncer,” John of Nottingham, to slay not only the King, but
       also the royal favourite, Hugh le Despenser, and his father; the Prior of Coventry; the monastic
       steward; the manciple; and a number of other important personages. A secluded old manor-house,
       some two or three miles out of Coventry, was put at the disposal of Master John, and there he and
       his servant, Robert Marshall, promptly commenced business. They went to work in the bad
       old-fashioned way of modelling wax dolls or mommets of those whom they wished to destroy.
       Long pins were thrust through the figures, and they were slowly melted before a fire. The first
       unfortunate upon whom this experiment was tried, Richard de Sowe, a prominent courtier and
       close friend of the King, was suddenly taken with agonizing pains, and when Marshall visited the
       house, as if casually, in order that he might report the results of this sympathetic sorcery to the
       wizard, he found their hapless victim in a high delirium. When this state of things was promptly
       conveyed to him, Master John struck a pin through the heart of the image, and in the morning the
       news reached them that de Sowe had breathed his last. Marshall, who was by now in an extremity
       of terror, betook himself to a justice and laid bare all that was happening and had happened, with
       the immediate result that Master John and the gang of conspirators were arrested. It must be
       remembered that in 1324 the final rebellion against King Edward II had openly broken forth on all
       sides. A truce of thirteen years had been arranged with Scotland, and though the English might
       refuse Bruce his royal title he was henceforward the warrior king of an independent country. It is
       true that in May, 1322, the York Parliament had not only reversed the exile of the Despensers,
       declaring the pardons which had been granted their opponents null and void, as well as voting for
       the repeal of the Ordinances of 1311, and the Despensers were working for, and fully alive to the
       necessity of, good and stable government, but none the less the situation was something more than
       perilous; the Exchequer was well-nigh drained; there was rioting and bloodshed in almost every
       large town; and worst of all, in 1323 the younger Roger Mortimer had escaped from the Tower and
       got away safely to the Continent. There were French troubles to boot; Charles IV, who in 1322 had
       succeeded to the throne, would accept no excuse from Edward for any postponement of homage,
       and in this very year, 1324, declaring the English possessions forfeited, he proceeded to occupy


file:///C|/!!witch/mm00c3.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:04:45 PM]
Introduction of 1928 Edition - P.3

       the territory with an army, when it soon became part of the French dominion. There can be not
       doubt that the citizens of Coventry were political intriguers, and since they were at the moment
       unable openly to rebel against their sovran lord, taking advantage of the fact that he was harassed
       and pressed at so critical a juncture, they proceeded against him by the dark and tortuous ways of
       black magic.
             Very many similar conspiracies in which sorcery was mixed up with treasonable practices
       and attempts might be cited, but only a few of the most important must be mentioned. Rather more
       than a century later than the reign of Edward II, in 1441, one of the greatest and most influential
       ladies in all England, “the Duchesse of Gloucestre, was arrested and put to holt, for she was
       suspecte of treson.” This, of course, was purely a political case, and the wife of Duke Humphrey
       had unfortunately by her indiscretion and something worse given her husband's enemies an
       opportunity to attack him by her ruin. An astrologer, attached to the Duke's household, when taken
       and charged with “werchyrye of sorcery against the King,” confessed that he had often cast the
       horoscope of the Duchess to find out if her husband would ever wear the English crown, the way
       to which they had attempted to smooth by making a wax image of Henry VI and melting it before
       a magic fire to bring about the King's decease. A whole crowd of witches, male and female, were
       involved in the case, and among these was Margery Jourdemain, a known a notorious invoker of
       demons and an old trafficker in evil charms. Eleanor Cobham was incontinently brought before a
       court presided over by three Bishops, London, Lincoln, and Norwich. She was found guilty both of
       high treason and sorcery, and after having been compelled to do public penance in the streets of
       London, she was imprisoned for life, according to the more authoritative account at Peel Castle in
       the Isle of Man. Her accomplices were executed at London.
             In the days of Edward IV it was commonly gossiped that the Duchess of Bedford was a
       witch, who by her spells had fascinated the King with the beauty of her daughter Elizabeth, whom
       he made his bride, in spite of the fact that he had plighted his troth to Eleanor Butler, the heiress of
       the Earl of Shrewsbury. So open did the scandal become that the Duchess of Bedford lodged an
       official complaint with the Privy Council, and an inquiry was ordered, but, as might have been
       suscepted, this completely cleared the lady. Nevertheless, five years later the charges were
       renewed by the Lord Protector, the Duke of Gloucester. Nor was this the first time in English
       history that some fair dame was said to have fascinated a monarch, not only by her beauty but also
       by unlawful means. When the so-called “Good Parliament” was convened in April, 1376, their
       first business seemed to be to attack the royal favourite, Alice Perrers, and amongst the
       multiplicity of charges which they brought against her, not the least deadly was the accusation of
       witchcraft. Her ascendancy over the King was attributed to the enchantments and experiments of a
       Dominican friar, learned in many a cantrip and cabala, whom she entertained in her house, and
       who had fashioned two pictures of Edward and Alive which, when suffumigated with the incense
       of mysterious herbs and gums, mandrakes, sweet calamus, caryophylleae, storax, benzoin, and
       other plants plucked beneath the full moon what time Venus was in ascendant, caused the old King
       to dote upon this lovely concubine. With great difficulty by a subtle ruse the friar was arrested, and
       he thought himself lucky to escape with relegation to a remote house under the strictest observance
       of his Order, whence, however, he was soon to be recalled with honour and reward, since the Good
       Parliament shortly came to an end, and Alice Perrers, who now stood higher in favour than ever,
       was not slow to heap lavish gifts upon her supporters, and to visit her enemies with condign
       punishment.
             It is often forgotten that in the troublous days of Henry VIII the whole country swarmed with


file:///C|/!!witch/mm00c3.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:04:45 PM]
Introduction of 1928 Edition - P.3

       astrologers and sorcerers, to whom high and low alike made constant resort. The King himself, a
       prey to the idlest superstitions, ever lent a credulous ear to the most foolish prophecies and old
       wives' abracadabra. When, as so speedily happened, he wearied of Anne Boleyn, he openly gave it
       as his opinion that he had “made this marriage seduced by witchcraft; and that this was evident
       because God did not permit them to have any male issue.”
             There was nobody more thoroughly scared of witchcraft than Henry's daughter, Elizabeth,
       and as John Jewel was preaching his famous sermon before her in February, 1560, he described at
       length how “this kind of people (I mean witches and sorcerers) within these few last years are
       marvellously increased within this Your Grace's realm;” he then related how owing to dark spells
       he had known many “pine away even to death.” “I pray God,” he unctuously cried, “they may
       never practise further than upon the subjects!” This was certainly enough to ensure that drastic
       laws should be passed particularly to protect the Queen, who was probably both thrilled and
       complimented to think that her life was in danger. It is exceedingly doubtful, whether there was
       any conspiracy at all which would have attempted Elizabeth's personal safety. There were, of
       course, during the imprisonment of the Queen of Scots, designs to liberate this unfortunate
       Princess, and Walsingham with his fellows used to tickle the vanity of Gloriana be regaling her
       with melodramatic accounts of dark schemes and secret machinations which they had, with a very
       shrewd knowledge of stagecraft, for the most part themselves arranged and contrived, so we may
       regard the Act of 1581, 23 Eliz., Cap. II, as mere finesse and chicane. That there were witches in
       England is very certain, but there seems no evidence at all that there were attempts upon the life of
       Elizabeth. None the less the point is important, since it shows that in men's minds sorcery was
       inexplicably mixed up with politics. The statute runs as follows: “That if any person . . . during the
       life of our said Sovereign Lady the Queen's Majesty that now is, either within her Highness'
       dominions or without, shall be setting or erecting any figure or by casting of nativities or by
       calculation or by any prophesying, witchcraft, conjurations, or other like unlawful means
       whatsoever, seek to know, and shall set forth by express words, deeds, or writings, how long her
       Majesty shall live, or who shall reign a king or queen of this realm of England after her Highness'
       decease . . . that then every such offence shall be felony, and every offender therein, and also all
       his aiders (etc.), shall be judged as felons and shall suffer pain of death and forfeit as in case of
       felony is used, without any benefit of clergy or sanctuary.”


                                                                   Page 3 of 8


                                     Introduction to 1928 Edition continued . . .

                                                  Main Index


                                         “The Malleus Maleficarum” was transcribed by
                                              Wicasta Lovelace and Christie Rice.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.



file:///C|/!!witch/mm00c3.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:04:45 PM]
Notes

           Guillotined in 1794.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192815.html [2002-01-20 12:04:45 PM]
Notes

           Proudhon, “La Révolution au XIXième siècle,” p. 290.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192816.html [2002-01-20 12:04:45 PM]
Notes

           The last trial and judicial execution in Europe itself was probably that of two aged beldames,
        Satanists, who were burned at the stake in Poland, 1793, the year of the Second Partition, during
        the reign of Stanislaus Augustus Poniatowski.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192817.html [2002-01-20 12:04:45 PM]
Notes

            This is certainly one of the oldest and most universal of spells. To effect the death of a man, or
        to injure him by making an image in his likeness, and mutilating or destroying this image, is a
        practice found throughout the whole wide world from its earliest years. It is common both in
        Babylon and in the Egypt of the Pharoahs, when magicians kneaded puppets of clay or pitch
        moistened with honey. If it were possible to mingle therewith a drop of a man's blood, the parings
        of his nails, a few hairs from his body, a thread or two from his garments, it gave the warlock the
        greater power over him. In ancient Greece and Rome precisely the same ideas prevailed, and
        allusions may be found ni Theocritus (“Idyll” II), Vergil (“Eclogue” VIII, 75-82), Ovid
        (“Heroides,” VI, 91, sqq.; “Amores,” III, vii, 29, sqq.), and many more. (See R. Wunsch, “Eine
        antike Rachepuppe,” “Philologus,” lxi, 1902, pp. 26-31.) We find this charm among the Ojebway
        Indians, the Cora Indians of Mexico, the Malays, the Chinese and Japanese, the aborigines
        throughout Australia, the Hindoos, both in ancient India and at the present day, the Burmese,
        many Arab tribes of Northern Africa, in Turkey, in Italy and the remoter villages of France, in
        Ireland and Scotland, nor is it (in one shape and form or another) yet unknown in the country
        districts of England.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192818.html [2002-01-20 12:04:46 PM]
Notes

           Some of the chronicles say Chester.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192819.html [2002-01-20 12:04:46 PM]
Notes

          This is referred to in Heywood's “King Edward IV,” 4to, 1600, in the opening scene, where the
        Duchess of York, the King's mother says:
          O Edward, Edward! fly and leave this place,
          Wherein, poor silly King, thou are enchanted.
          This is her dam of Bedford's work, her mother,
          That hath bewitch'd thee, Edward, my poor child.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192820.html [2002-01-20 12:04:46 PM]
Notes

          This is probably the exact date. The discourse in question was certainly delivered between
        November, 1559, and 17 March, 1560.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192821.html [2002-01-20 12:04:46 PM]
Introduction of 1928 Edition - P.4


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM

                         INTRODUCTION TO 1928 EDITION
             The famous Scotch witch trial or 1590, when it was proved that upon 31 October in the
       preceding year, All Hallow E'en, a gang of more than two hundred persons had assembled for their
       rites at the old haunted church of North Berwick, where they consulted with their Master, “the
       Devil,” how they might most efficaciously kill King James, is too well known to require more than
       a passing mention, but it may be remembered that Agnes Sampson confessed that she had
       endeavoured to poison the King in various ways, and that she was also avowed that she had
       fashioned a wax mommet, saying with certain horrid maledictions as she wrought the work: “This
       is King James the sext, ordinit to be consumed at the instance of a noble man Francis Erle of
       Bodowell.” The contriver of this far-reaching conspiracy was indeed none other than Francis
       Stewart, Earl of Bothwell, who, as common knowledge bruited, almost overtly aspired to the
       throne and was perfectly reckless how he compassed his ends. It was he, no doubt, who figured as
       “the Devil” at the meeting in the deserted and ill-omened kirkyard. In fact this is almost
       conclusively shown by a statement of Barbara Napier when she was interrogated with regard to
       their objects in the attempted murder of the King. She gave as her reason “that another might have
       ruled in his Majesty's place, and the Government might have gone to the Devil.” That is to say, to
       Francis Bothwell. The birth of Prince Henry at Stirling, 19 February, 1594, and further of Prince
       Charles at Dunfermline, 19 November, 1600, must have dashed all Bothwell's hopes to the ground.
       Moreover, the vast organization of revolutionaries and witches had been completely broken up,
       and accordingly there was nothing left for him to do but to seek safety in some distant land. There
       is an extremely significant reference to him in Sandys, who, speaking of Calabria in the year 1610,
       writes: “Here a certaine Calabrian hearing that I was an English man, came to me, and would
       needs persuade me that I had insight in magicke: for the Earl Bothel was my countryman, who
       liues at Naples, and is in these parts famous for suspected negromancie.”
             In French history even more notorious than the case of the Berwick witches were the
       shocking scandals involving both poisoning and witchcraft that came to light and were being
       investigated in 1679-82. At least two hundred and fifty persons, of whom many were the
       representatives and scions of the highest houses in the land, were deeply implicated in these
       abominations, and it is no matter for surprise that a vast number of the reports and several entire
       dossiers and registers have completely disappeared. The central figures were the Abbé Guibourg
       and Catherine Deshayes, more generally known as La Voisin, whose house in the Rue Beauregard
       was for years the rendezvous of a host of inquirers drawn from all classes of societym from
       palaces and prisons, from the lowest slums of the vilest underworld. That it was a huge and
       far-reaching political conspiracy is patent form the fact that the lives of Louis XIV, the Queen, the
       Dauphin, Louise de la Vallière, and the Duchesse de Fontanges had been attempted secretly again
       and again, whilst as for Colbert, scores of his enemies were constantly entreating for some swift
       sure poison, constantly participating in unhallowed rites which might lay low the all-powerful

file:///C|/!!witch/mm00c4.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:04:47 PM]
Introduction of 1928 Edition - P.4

       Minister. It soon came to light that Madame de Montespan and the Comtesse de Soisson (Olympe
       Mancini) were both deeply implicated, whilst the Comtesse de Rouse and Madame de Polignac in
       particular, coveting a lodging in the bed royal, had persistently sought to bring about the death of
       Louise de la Vallière. It is curious indeed to recognize the author of The Rehearsal in this train, but
       there flits in and out among the witches and anarchists a figure who can almost certainly be
       identified with George Villiers, Duke of Buckingham. Yet this is the less surprising when we
       remember how very nearly he stirred up a mutiny, if not an insurrection, against the King who had
       so particularly favoured and honoured him, but who, in the words of a contemporary, “knew him
       to be capable of the blackest designs.” Of Buckingham it has been written without exaggeration:
       “As to his personal character it is impossible to say anything in its vindication; for though his
       severest enemies acknowledge him to have possessed great vivacity and a quickness of parts
       peculiarly adapted to the purposes of ridicule, yet his warmest advocates have never attributed to
       him a single virtue. His generosity was profuseness, his wit malevolence, the gratification of his
       passions his sole aim through life.” When we consider the alliance of Buckingham with the
       infamous Shaftesbury, we need hardly wonder that whilst in Paris he frequented the haunts of this
       terrible society, and was present at, nay, even participated in the Satanic mass and other of their
       horrible mysteries. At the house of La Voisin necromancy was continually practised, poisons were
       brewed, the liturgy of hell was celebrated, and it was undoubtedly the hub of every crime and ever
       infamy. Other instances, and not a few, might be quoted from French history to show how
       intimately politics were connected with witchcraft. Here Madame de Montespan, aiming at the
       French throne, an ambition which involved the death of the Queen, Maria Theresa of Austria, at
       once resorts to black magic, and attempts to effect her purpose by aid of those who were infamous
       as past adepts in this horrid craft.
             Even in the Papal States themselves such abominations were not unknown, and in 1633 Rome
       was alarmed and confounded by an attempt upon the life of Urban VIII. It seems that some
       charlatan had announced to Giacinto Centini, nephew of the Cardinal d’Ascoli, that his uncle
       would succeed the reigning Pontiff in the Chair of S. Peter. The rash and foolish young man
       promptly attempted to hasten the event, and did not hesitate to resort to certain professors of occult
       arts to inquire when the next conclave would take place. He was so incredibly foolish that, far
       from attempting any subterfuge or disguise, he seems to have resorted to the houses of astrologers
       and other persons, who were already suspected of necromancy in the most open way, and further
       to have boasted among his intimates of the high honours which he expected his family would
       shortly enjoy. He first applied to one Fra Pietro, a Sicilian, who belonged to the Order of
       Augustinian Eremites. This occultist told him that the Cardinal d’Ascoli would be elected at the
       next conclave, but that the present Pope had many years to live. Upon seeing the young man's
       bitter disappointment the cunning mage whispered that it was in his power to bring about the event
       much sooner than it would happen in the ordinary course of affairs. Needless to say, the
       proposition was taken up with alacrity, but it was necessary to employ the services of two other
       diviners, and they accordingly selected for the task Fra Cherubino of Ancona, a Franciscan, and
       Fra Domenico of the Eremite monastery of S. Agostino at Fermo. The friars then deligently set to
       work to carry out their murderous projects. A number of ceremonies and incantations were
       performed which entailed considerable expense, and for which it was needful to procure exotic
       herbs and drugs and rare instruments of goetry that could not readily be had without attracting
       considerable curiosity. It appeared, however, as if all their charms and spells, their demoniac
       eucharists and litanies, were quite ineffective, since Urban at sixty-five years of age remained


file:///C|/!!witch/mm00c4.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:04:47 PM]
Introduction of 1928 Edition - P.4

       perfectly hale and hearty and was indeed extraordinarily active in his pontificate. Young Centini
       became manifestly impatient and spurred the wizards on to greater efforts. It really seems as if,
       vexed beyond measure and goaded to exasperation by his importunities, they flung all caution to
       the winds, whilst he himself proclaimed so magnificently what he would do for his friends in a few
       weeks or months after he had assumed the authority of Papal nephew, that it was hardly a matter of
       surprise when the Holy Office suddenly descended upon the four accomplices and brought them to
       the bar. Amongst the many charges which were put forward was one of causing “a statue of wax to
       be made of Urban VIII, in order that its dissolution might ensure that of the Pope.” This in itself
       would have been sufficiently damning, but there were many other criminal accounts all tending to
       the same end, all proven up to the hilt. The result was that Centini, Fra Pietro, and Fra Cherubino
       were executed in the Campo di Fiore, on Sunday, 22 April, 1634, whilst Fra Domenico, who was
       less desperately involved, was relegated for life to the galleys.
             These few instances I have dwelt upon in detail and at some length in order to show how
       constantly and continually in various countries and at various times witchcraft and magical
       practices were mixed up with political plots and anarchical agitation. There can be no doubt - and
       this is a fact which is so often not recognized (or it may be forgotten) that one cannot emphasize it
       too frequently - that witchcraft in its myriad aspects and myriad ramifications is a huge conspiracy
       against civilization. It was as such that the Inquisitors knew it, and it was this which gave rise to
       the extensive literature on the subject, those treatises of which the Malleus Maleficarum is perhaps
       the best known among the other writers. As early as 600 S. Gregory I had spoken in severest
       terms, enjoining the punishment of sorcerers and those who trafficked in black magic. It will be
       noted that he speaks of them as more often belonging to that class termed serui, that is to say, the
       very people from whom for the most part Nihilists and Bolsheviks have sprung in modern days.
       Writing to Januarius, Biship of Cagliari, the Pope says: “Contra idolorum cultores, uel aruspices
       atque sortilegos, fraternitatem uestram uehementius pastorali hortamur inuigilare custodia . . . et si
       quidem serui sunt, uerberibus cruciatibusque, quibus ad emendationem peruenire ualeant, castigare
       si uero sunt liberi, inclusione digna districtaque sunt in poenitentiam redigendi. . . .” But the first
       Papal ordinance directly dealing with witchcraft may not unfairly be said to be the Bull addressed
       in 1233 by Pope Gregory IX (Ugolino, Count of Segni) to the famous Conrad of Marburg, bidding
       him proceed against the Luciferians, who were overtly given over to Satanism. If this ardent
       Dominican must not strictly be considered as having introduced the Inquisition to Germany, he at
       any rate enjoyed Inquisitorial methods. Generally, perhaps, he is best known as the stern and
       unbending spiritual director of that gentle soul S. Elizabeth of Hungary. Conrad of Marburg is
       certainly a type of the strictest and most austere judge, but it should be remembered that he spared
       himself no more than he spared others, that he was swayed by no fear of persons of danger of
       death, that even if he were inflexible and perhaps fanatical, the terrible situation with which he had
       to deal demanded such a man, and he was throughout supported by the supreme authority of
       Gregory IX. That he was harsh and unlovable is, perhaps, true enough, but it is more than doubtful
       whether a man of gentler disposition could have faced the difficulties that presented themselves on
       every side. Even his most prejudiced critics have never denied the singleness of his convictions
       and his courage. He was murdered on the highway, 30 July, 1233, in the pursuit of his duties, but it
       has been well said that “it is, perhaps, significant that the Church has never set the seal of
       canonization upon his martyrdom.”
             On 13, December, 1258, Pope Alexander IV (Rinaldo Conti) issued a Bull to the Franciscan
       Inquisitors bidding them refrain from judging any cases of witchcraft unless there was some very

file:///C|/!!witch/mm00c4.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:04:47 PM]
Introduction of 1928 Edition - P.4

       strong reason to suppose that heretical practice could also be amply proved. On 10 January, 1260,
       the same Pontiff addressed a similar Bull to the Dominicans. But it is clear that by now the two
       things could not be disentangled.
             The Bull Dudum ad audientiam nostram peruenit of Boniface VIII (Benedetto Gaetani) deals
       with the charges against Walter Langton, Bishop of Conventry and Lichfield, but it may be classed
       as individual rather than general.
             Several Bulls were published by John XXII (Jacques d’Euse) and by Benedict XII (Jacques
       Fournier, O. Cist), both Avignon Popes, and these weighty documents deal with witchcraft in the
       fullest detail, anathematizing all such abominations. Gregory XI (Pierre Roger de Beaufort);
       Alexander V (Petros Filartis, a Cretan), who ruled but eleven months, from June 1409 to May
       1410; and Martin V (Ottone Colonna); each put forth one Bull on the subject. To Eugenius IV
       (Gabriello Condulmaro) we owe four Bulls which fulminate against sorcery and black magic. The
       first of these, 24 February, 1434, is addressed from Florence to the Franciscan Inquisitor, Pontius
       Fougeyron. On 1 August, 1451, the Dominican Inquisitor Hugo Niger received a Bull from
       Nicholas V (Tomaso Parentucelli). Callistus III (Alfonso de Borja) and Pius II (Enea Silvio de’
       Piccolomini) each issued one Bull denouncing the necromantic crew.
             On 9 August, 1471, the Franciscan friar, Francesco della Rovere, ascended the throne of Peter
       as Sixtus IV. His Pontificate has been severely criticized by those who forget that the Pope was a
       temporal Prince and in justice bound to defend his territory against the continual aggression of the
       Italian despots. His private life was blameless, and the stories which were circulated by such
       writers as Stefano Infessura in his Diarium are entirely without foundation. Sixtus was an eminent
       theologian, he is the author of an admirable treatise on the Immaculate Conception, and it is
       significant that he took strong measures to curb the judicial severities of Tomàs de Torquemada,
       whom he had appointed Grand Inquisitor of Castile, 11 February, 1482. During his reign he
       published three Bulls directly attacking sorcery, which he clearly identified with heresy, an
       opinion of the deepest weight when pronounced by one who had so penetrating a knowledge of the
       political currents of the day. There can be no doubt that he saw the society of witches to be nothing
       else than a vast international of anti-social revolutionaries. The first Bull is dated 17 June, 1473;
       the second 1 April. 1478; and the last 21 October, 1483.
                                                                   Page 4 of 8


                                     Introduction to 1928 Edition continued . . .

                                                  Main Index


                                         “The Malleus Maleficarum” was transcribed by
                                              Wicasta Lovelace and Christie Rice.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/mm00c4.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:04:47 PM]
Notes

           “Relation of a Journey,” London, 1632.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192822.html [2002-01-20 12:04:47 PM]
Notes

           “Biographia Dramatica,” Vol. I, p. 729.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192823.html [2002-01-20 12:04:47 PM]
Notes

           Reigned 590-604.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192824.html [2002-01-20 12:04:48 PM]
Notes

           Reigned 1227-41. He was almost one hundred years old at the time of his death.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192825.html [2002-01-20 12:04:48 PM]
Notes

           A. L. Maycock, “The Inquisition,” 1926, p. 235.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192826.html [2002-01-20 12:04:48 PM]
Notes

           Reigned 1254-61.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192827.html [2002-01-20 12:04:48 PM]
Notes

           24 December, 1294-11 October, 1303.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192828.html [2002-01-20 12:04:49 PM]
Notes

           A close investigation was made, but the Bishop completely cleared himself of the charges.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192829.html [2002-01-20 12:04:49 PM]
Notes

           7 August, 1316-4 December, 1334.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192830.html [2002-01-20 12:04:49 PM]
Notes

           20 December, 1334-25 April, 1342.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192831.html [2002-01-20 12:04:49 PM]
Notes

           30 December, 1370-27 March, 1378.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192832.html [2002-01-20 12:04:49 PM]
Notes

           11 November, 1417-20 February, 1431.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192833.html [2002-01-20 12:04:50 PM]
Notes

           3 March, 1431-23 February, 1447.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192834.html [2002-01-20 12:04:50 PM]
Notes

           6 March, 1447-24 March, 1455.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192835.html [2002-01-20 12:04:50 PM]
Notes

           8 April, 1455-6 August, 1458.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192836.html [2002-01-20 12:04:50 PM]
Notes

           19 August, 1458-15 August, 1464.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192837.html [2002-01-20 12:04:50 PM]
Notes

            Stefano Infessura was born at Rome circa 1435 and died there circa 1500. This turbulent spirit
        was entangled in the conspiracy of Stefano Porcaro against Nicholas V (1453), which aimed at
        overturning the Papal government and making Rome a republic. His violent bias makes his
        “Diarium urbis Rome,” a chronicle from 1294 to 1494 (written partly in Latin and partly in
        Italian), of little value, as he did not hesitate to reproduce any idle scandal, and even to invent
        notorious calumnies, concerning such Pontiffs as Sixtus IV and Innocent VIII.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192838.html [2002-01-20 12:04:51 PM]
Introduction of 1928 Edition - P.5


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM

                         INTRODUCTION TO 1928 EDITION
             It has been necessarily thus briefly to review this important series of Papal documents to
       show that the famous Bull Summis desiderantes affectibus, 9 December, 1484, which Innocent
       VIII addressed to the authors of the Malleus Maleficarum, is no isolated and extraordinary
       document, but merely one in the long and important record of Papal utterances. although at the
       same time it is of the greatest importance and supremely authoritative. It has, however, been very
       frequently asserted, not only be prejudiced and unscrupulous chroniclers, but also by scholars of
       standing and repute, that this Bull of Innocent VIII, if not, as many appear to suppose, actually the
       prime cause and origin of the crusade against witches, at any rate gave the prosecution and
       energizing power and an authority which hitherto they had not, and which save for this Bull they
       could not ever have, commanded and possessed.
             It will not be impertinent then here very briefly to inquire what authority Papal Bulls may be
       considered to enjoy in general, and what weight was, and is, carried by this particular document of
       9 December, 1484.
             To enter into a history of Bulls and Briefs would require a long and elaborate monograph, so
       we must be content to remind ourselves that the term bulla, which in classical Latin meant a
       water-bubble, a bubble then came to mean a boss of metal, such as the knob upon a door. (By
       transference it also implied a certain kind of amulet, generally made of gold, which was worn upon
       the neck, especially by noble youths). Hence in course of time the word bulla indicated the leaden
       seals by which Papal (and even royal) documents were authenticated, and by an easy transition we
       recognize that towards the end of the twelfth century a Bull is the document itself. Naturally very
       many kinds of edicts are issued from the Cancellaria, but a Bull is an instrument of especial weight
       and importance, and it differs both in form and detail from constitutions, encyclicals, briefs,
       decrees, privileges, and rescripts. It should be remarked, however, that the term Bull has
       conveniently been used to denote all these, especially if they are Papal letters of any early date. By
       the fifteenth century clearer distinctions were insisted upon and maintained.
             A Bull was written in Latin and as late as the death of Pope Pius IX, 1878, the scrittura
       bollatica, an archaic and difficult type of Gothic characters much contracted and wholly
       unpunctuated was employed. This proved often well-nigh indecipherable to those who were not
       trained to the script, and accordingly there accompanied the Bull a transsumptum in an ordinary
       plain hand. The seal, appended by red and yellow (sometimes white) laces, generally bore on one
       side the figures of SS. Peter and Paul; on the other a medallion or the name of the reigning Pontiff.
             A Bull begins thus: “N. Episcopus Seruus seruorum Dei ad perpetuam rei memoriam.” It is
       dated “Anno incarnationis Domini,” and also “Pontificatus Nostri anno primo (uel secundom,
       tertio, etc.).” Those Bulls which set forth and define some particular statement will be found to add
       certain minatory clauses directed against those who obstinately refuse to accept the Papal decision.
             It should be remembered that, as has already been said, the famous Bull of Pope Innocent

file:///C|/!!witch/mm00c5.html (1 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:04:51 PM]
Introduction of 1928 Edition - P.5

       VIII is only one in a long line of Apostolic Letters dealing with the subject of witchcraft.
             On 18 June, 1485, the Pontiff again recommended the two Inquisitors to Berthold,
       Archbishop of Mainz, in a Bull Pro causa fidei; upon the same date a similar Bull was sent to the
       Archduke Sigismund, and a Brief to Abbot John of Wingarten, who is highly praised for his
       devotion and zeal. On 30 September, 1486, a Bull addressed to the Bishop of Brescia and to
       Antonio di Brescia, O.P., Inquisitor for Lombardy, emphasizes the close connexion, nay, the
       identity of witchcraft with heresy.
             Alexander VI published two Bulls upon the same theme, and in a Bull of Julius II there is a
       solemn description of that abomination the Black Mass, which is perhaps the central feature of the
       worship of Satanists, and which is unhappily yet celebrated to-day in Londin, in Paris, in Berlin,
       and in many another great city.
             Leo X, the great Pope of Humanism, issued on Bull on the subject; but even more important
       is the Bull Dudum uti nobis exponi fecisti, 20 July, 1523, which speaks of the horrible abuse of the
       Sacrament in sorceries and the charms confuted by witches.
             We have two briefs of Clement VII; and on 5 January, 1586, was published that long and
       weighty Constitution of Sixtus V, Coeli et Terrae Creator Deus, which denounces all those who
       are devoted to Judicial Astrology and kindred arts that are envenomed with black magic and
       goetry. There is a Constitution of Gregory XV, Omnipotentis Dei, 20 March, 1623; and a
       Constitution of Urban VIII, Inscrutabilis iudiciorum Dei altitudo, 1 April, 1631, which - if we
       except the recent condemnation of Spiritism in the nineteenth century - may be said to be the last
       Apostolic document directed against these foul and devilish practices.
             We may now consider the exact force of the Apostolic Bull Summis desiderantes affectibus
       issed on 9 December, 1484, by Innocent VIII to Fr. Henry Kramer and Fr. James Sprenger.
             In the first place, it is superflous to say that no Bull would have been published without the
       utmost deliberation, long considering of phrases, and above all earnest prayer. This document of
       Pope Innocent commences with the set grave formula of a Bull of the greatest weight and
       solemnity. “Innocentius Episcopus Seruus seruorum Dei ad perpetuam rei memoriam.” It draws to
       its conclusion with no brief and succinct prohibitory clauses but with a solemn measured period:
       “Non obstantibus praemissis ac constitutionibus et ordinationibus Apostolicis contrariis
       quibuscunque. . . .” The noble and momentous sentences are built up word by word, beat by beat,
       ever growing more and more authoritative, more and more judicial, until they culminate in the
       minatory and imprecatory clauses which are so impressive, so definite, that no loophole is left for
       escape, no turn for evasion. “Nulli ergo omnino hominum liceat hanc paganim nostrae
       declarationis extentionis concessionis et mandati infringere uel ei ausu temeraris contrarie Si qui
       autem attentate praesumpserit indignationem omnipotentis Dei ac beatorum Petri et Pauli
       Apostolorum eius se nouerit incursurum.” If any man shall presume to go against the tenor let him
       know that therein he will bring down upon himself the wrath of Almighty God and of the Blessed
       Apostles Peter and Paul.
             Could words weightier be found?
             Are we then to class this Bull with the Bulla dogmatica Ineffabilis Deus wherein Pope Pius
       IX proclaimed the dogma of the Immaculate Conception? Such a position is clearly tenable, but
       even if we do not insist that the Bull of Innocent VIII is an infallible utterance, since the Summis
       desiderantes affectibus does not in set terms define a dogma although it does set forth sure and
       certain truths, it must at the very least be held to be a document of supreme and absolute authority,
       of dogmatic force. It belongs to that class of ex cathedra utterances “for which infallibility is


file:///C|/!!witch/mm00c5.html (2 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:04:51 PM]
Introduction of 1928 Edition - P.5

       claimed on the ground, not indeed of the terms of the Vatican definition, but of the constant
       practice of the Holy See, the consentient teaching of the theologians, as well as the clearest
       deductions of the principles of faith.” Accordingly the opinion of a person who rashly impugns
       this Bull is manifestly to be gravely censures as erronea, sapiens haeresim, captiosa, subuersiua
       hierarchiae; erroneous, savouring of heresy, captious, subversive of the hierarchy.
             Without exception non-Catholic historians have either in no measured language denounced or
       else with sorrow deplored the Bull of Innocent VIII as a most pernicious and unhappy document, a
       perpetual and irrevocable manifesto of the unchanged and unchangeable mind of the Papacy. From
       this point of view they are entirely justified, and their attitude is undeniably logical and right. The
       Summis desideranted affectibus is either a dogmatic exposition by Christ's Vicar upon earth or it is
       altogether abominable.
             Hansen, either in honest error or of intent, willfully misleads when he writes, “it is perfectly
       obvious that the Bull pronounces no dogmatic decision.” As has been pointed out, in one very
       narrow and technical sense this may be correct - yet even here the opposite is arguable and
       probably true - but such a statement thrown forth without qualification is calculated to create, and
       undoubtedly does create, an entirely false impression. It is all the more amazing to find that the
       writer of the article upon “Witchcraft” in the Catholic Encyclopaedia quotes Hansen with
       complete approval and gleefully adds with regard to the Bull of Innocent VIII, “neither does the
       form suggest that the Pope wishes to bind anyone to believe more about the reality of witchcraft
       than is involved in the utterances of Holy Scripture,” a statement which is essentially Protestant in
       its nature, and, as is acknowledged by every historian of whatsoever colour or creed, entirely
       untrue. By its appearance in a standard work of reference, which is on the shelves of every library,
       this article upon “Witchcraft” acquires a certain title to consideration which upon its merits it
       might otherwise lack. It is signed Herbert Thurston, and turning to the list of “Contributors to the
       Fifteenth Volume” we duly see “Thurston, Herbert, S.J., London.” Since a Jesuit Father
       emphasizes in a well-known (and presumably authoritative) Catholic work an opinion so
       derogatory to the Holy See and so definitely opposed to all historians, one is entitled to express
       curiosity concerning other writings which may not have come from his pen. I find that for a
       considerable number of years Fr. Thurston has been contributing to The Month a series of articles
       upon mystical phenomena and upon various aspects of mysticism, such as the Incorruption of the
       bodies of Saints and Beati, the Stigmata, the Prophecies of holy persons, the miracles of Crucifixes
       that bleed or pictures of the Madonna which move, famous Sanctuaries, the inner life of and
       wonderful events connected with persons still living who have acquired a reputation for sanctity.
       This busy writer directly or incidentally has dealt with that famous ecstatica Anne Catherine
       Emmerich; the Crucifix of Limpias; Our Lady of Campocavallo; S. Januarus; the Ven. Maria
       d’Agreda; Gemma Galgani; Padre Pio Pietralcina; that gentle soul Teresa Higginson, the beauty of
       whose life has attracted thousands, but whom Fr. Thurston considers hysterical and masochistic
       and whose devotions to him savour of the “snowball” prayer; Pope Alexander VI; the origin of the
       Rosary; the Carmelite scapular; and very many themes beside. Here was have a mass of material,
       and even a casual glance through these pages will suffice to show the ugly prejudice which
       informs the whole. The intimate discussions on miracles, spiritual graces and physical phenomena,
       which above all require faith, reverence, sympathy, tact and understanding, are conducted with a
       roughness and a rudeness infinitely regrettable. What is worse, in every case Catholic tradition and
       loyal Catholic feeling are thrust to one side; the note of scepticism, of modernism, and even of
       rationalism is arrogantly dominant. Tender miracles of healing wrought at some old sanctuary, the

file:///C|/!!witch/mm00c5.html (3 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:04:51 PM]
Introduction of 1928 Edition - P.5

       records of some hidden life of holiness secretly lived amongst us in the cloister or the home, these
       things seem to provoke Fr. Thurston to such a pitch of annoyance that he cannot refrain from
       venting his utmost spleen. The obsession is certainly morbid. It is reasonable to suppose that a
       lengthy series of papers all concentrating upon certain aspects of mysticism would have collected
       in one volume, and it is extremely significant that in the autumn of 1923 a leading house
       announced among Forthcoming Books: “The Physical Phenomena of Mysticism. By the Rev.
       Herbert Thurston, S.J.” Although in active preparation, this has never seen the light. I have heard
       upon good authority that the ecclesiastical superiors took exception to such a publication. I may, of
       course, be wrong, and there can be no question that there is room for a different point of view, but
       I cannot divest my mind of the idea that the exaggerated rationalization of mystical phenomena
       conspicuous in the series of articles I have just considered may be by no means unwelcome to the
       Father of Lies. It really plays into his hands: first, because it makes the Church ridiculous by
       creating the impression that her mystics, particularly friars and nuns, are for the most part sickly
       hysterical subjects, deceivers and deceived, who would be fit inmates of Bedlam; that many of her
       most reverend shrines, Limpias, Campocavallo, and the sanctuaries of Naples, are frauds and
       conscious imposture; and, secondly, because it condemns and brings into ridicule that note of
       holiness which theologians declare is one of the distinctive marks of the true Church.
            There is also evil speaking of dignities. In 1924 the Right Rev. Mgr. Oeter de Roo published
       an historical work in five volumes, Materials for a History of Pope Alexander VI, his Relatives
       and his Time, wherein he demonstrates his thesis that Pope Alexander VI was “a man of good
       moral character and an excellent Pope.” This is quite enough for Fr. Thurston to assail him in the
       most vulgar and ill-bred way. The historian is a “crank,” “constitutionally incapable,”
       “extravagant,” and one who writes in “queer English,” and by rehabilitating Alexander VI has
       “wasted a good deal of his own time.” “One would be loath to charge him with deliberate
       suggestio falis,” smugly remarks Fr. Thurston, and of course directly conveys that impression. As
       to Pope Alexander, the most odious charges are one more hurled against the maligned Pontiff, and
       Fr. Thurston for fifteen nauseating pages insists upon “the evil example of his private life.” This is
       unnecessary; it is untrue; it shows contempt of Christ's Vicar on earth.
                                                                   Page 5 of 8


                                     Introduction to 1928 Edition continued . . .

                                                  Main Index


                                         “The Malleus Maleficarum” was transcribed by
                                              Wicasta Lovelace and Christie Rice.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/mm00c5.html (4 of 4) [2002-01-20 12:04:51 PM]
Notes

           Cf. Ovid, “Metamorphoseon,” x, 734-35:
              ut pluuio per lucida caelo
           Surgere bulla solet.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192839.html [2002-01-20 12:04:52 PM]
Notes

            Cf. Cicero, “In Uerrum,” II, iv, 56: “Bullas aureas omnes ex his ualuis, quae erant et multae,
        et graues, non dubitauit auferre.”




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192840.html [2002-01-20 12:04:52 PM]
Notes

           There are also decrees of the Holy Office of 1856; 30 March, 1898; 24 April, 1917, etc.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192841.html [2002-01-20 12:04:52 PM]
Notes

           For a full account of the Papal Bulls, see my “Geography of Witchcraft,” 1927, c. vii, “Italy,”
        pp. 524-46.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192842.html [2002-01-20 12:04:52 PM]
Notes

            Similarly, Leo XIII undoubtedly meant the Bull “Apostolicae Curae,” 18 September, 1896, to
        fix the belief and practice of the Catholic Church for ever. In a letter to Cardinal Richard, 5
        November, 1896, the Pope declared that his intention has been absolute iudicare et penitus
        dirimere, and that all Catholics must receive his judgement as perpetuo firmam, ratam,
        irreuocabilem.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192843.html [2002-01-20 12:04:53 PM]
Notes

           “Zauberwahn . . . im Mittelalter,” Munich, 1900.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192844.html [2002-01-20 12:04:53 PM]
Notes

           New York, The Encyclopaedic Press, Inc., Copyright, 1913, Vol. XV, pp. 674-77.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192845.html [2002-01-20 12:04:53 PM]
Notes

           Concerning whom he wrote no less than four highly controversial articles, “The Month,”
        September to December, 1921, and in a fresh fit of exacerbation returned to the attack, “The
        Month,” January, 1924.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192846.html [2002-01-20 12:04:53 PM]
Notes

           One may contrast the beautiful and most devotional stufy of this shrine by my friend Professor
        Allison Peers with the cold sneers of Fr. Thurston's articles upon the miraculous Crucifix.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192847.html [2002-01-20 12:04:53 PM]
Notes

           “The Month,” April, 1925.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192848.html [2002-01-20 12:04:54 PM]
Introduction of 1928 Edition - P.6


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM

                         INTRODUCTION TO 1928 EDITION
              The most disquieting of all Fr. Thurston's writings that I know is without doubt his article
       upon the Holy House of Loreto, which is to be found in the Catholic Encyclopaedia, Vol. XIII, pp.
       454-56, “Santa Casa di Loreto.” Here he jubilantly proclaims that “the Lauretan tradition is beset
       with difficulties of the gravest kind. These have been skilfully presented in the much-discussed
       work of Canon Chevalier, ‘Notre Dame de Lorette’ (Paris, 1906). . . . His argument remains intact
       and has as yet found no adequate reply.” This last assertion is simply incorrect, as Canon U.
       Chevalier's theories have been answered and demolished both by Father A. Eschbach,
       Procurator-General of the Congregation of the Holy Ghost, in his exhaustive work La Vérité sur le
       Fair de Lorette, and by the Rev. G. E. Phillips in his excellent study Loreto and the Holy House.
       From a careful reading of the article “Santa Casa di Loreto” it is obvious that the writer does not
       accept the fact of the Translation of the Holy House; at least that is the only impression I can
       gather from his words as, ignoring an unbroken tradition, the pronouncements of more than fifty
       Popes, the devotion of innumerable saints, the piety of countless writers, he gratuitously piles
       argument upon argument and emphasizes objection after objection to reduce the Translation of the
       House of Nazareth from Palestine to Italy to the vague story of a picture of the Madonna brought
       from Tersato in Illyria to Loreto. With reference to Canon Chevalier's work, so highly applauded
       by Fr. Thurston, it is well known that the late saintly Pontiff Pius X openly showed his great
       displeasure at the book, and took care to let it be widely understood that such an attack upon the
       Holy House sorely vexed and grieved him. In a Decree, 12 April, 1916, Benedict XV, ordering the
       Feast of the Translation of the Holy House to be henceforward observed every year on the 10th
       December, in all the Dioceses and Religious Congregations of Italy and the adjacent Isles,
       solemnly and decisively declares that the Sanctuary of Loreto is “the House itself - translated from
       Palestine by the ministry of Angels - in which was born the Blessed Virgin Mary, and in which the
       Word was made Flesh.” In the face of this pronouncement it is hard to see how any Catholic can
       regard the Translation of the Holy House as a mere fairy tale to be classed with Jack and the
       Beanstalk or Hop o’ my Thumb. It is certain that Fr. Thurston's disedifying attack has given pain to
       thousands of pious souls, and in Italy I have heard an eminent theologian, an Archbishop, speak of
       these articles in terms of unsparing condemnation.
              Father Thurston is the author of a paper upon the subject of Pope Joan, but I am informed that
       it is no longer in print, and as I have not thought it worth while to make acquaintance with this
       lucubration I am unable to say whether he accepts the legend of this mythical dame as true or no.
              His bias evidently makes him incapable of dealing impartially with any historical fact, and
       even a sound and generally accepted theory would gain nothing by the adherence of so prejudiced
       an advocate. It has seemed worth while to utter a word of caution regarding his extraordinary
       output, and especially in our present connexion with reference to the article upon “Witchcraft,”
       which appears to me so little qualified to furnish the guidance readers may require in this difficult

file:///C|/!!witch/mm00c6.html (1 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:54 PM]
Introduction of 1928 Edition - P.6

       subject, and which by its inclusion in a standard work of reference might be deemed trustworthy
       and reliable.
             It is very certain then that the Bull of Innocent VIII, Summis desiderantes affectibus, was at
       least a document of the highest authority, and that the Pontiff herein clearly intended to set forth
       dogmatic facts, although this can be distinguished from the defining of a dogma. A dogmatic fact
       is not indeed a doctrine of revelation, but it is so intimately connected with a revealed doctrine that
       it would be impossible to deny the dogmatic fact without contradicting or seriously impugning the
       dogma. It would not be very difficult to show that any denial of the teaching of Pope Innocent VIII
       must traverse the Gospel accounts of demoniacs, the casting out of devils by Our Saviour, and His
       Divine words upon the activities of evil spirits.
             Giovanni Battista Cibò, the son of Arano Cibò and Teodorina de’ Mare, was born at Genoa in
       1432. His father, a high favourite with Callistus III (Alfonso de Borja), who reigned from 8 April,
       1455, to 6 August, 1458, had filled with distinction the senatorial office at Rome in 1455, and
       under King René won great honour as Viceroy of Naples. Having entered the household of
       Cardinal Calandrini, Giovanni Battista Cibò was in 1467 created Bisop of Savona by Paul II, in
       1473 Bishop of Molfetta by Sixtus IV, who raised him to the cardinalate in the following year. In
       the conclave which followed the death of this Pontiff, his great supporter proved to be Guiliano
       della Rovere, and on 29 August, 1484, he ascended the Chair of S. Peter, taking the name of
       Innocent VIII in memory, it is said, of his countryman, the Genoese Innocent IV (Sinibaldo de’
       Fieschi), who reigned from 25 June, 1243, to 7 December, 1254. The new Pope had to deal with a
       most difficult political situation, and before long found himself involved in a conflict with Naples.
       Innocent VIII made the most earnest endeavours to unite Christendom against the common enemy,
       the Turk, but the unhappy indecision among various princes unfortunately precluded any definite
       result, although the Rhodians surrendered to the Holy Father. As for Djem, the younger son of
       Mohammad II, this prince had fled for protection to the Knights of S. John, and Sultan Bajazet
       pledged himself to pay an annual allowance of 35,000 ducats for the safe-keeping of his brother.
       The Grand Master handed over Djem to the Pope and on 13 March, 1489, the Ottoman entered
       Rome, where he was treated with signal respect and assigned apartments in the Vatican itself.
             Innocent VIII only canonized one Saint, the Margrave Leopold of Austria, who was raised to
       the Altar 6 January, 1485. However, on 31 May, 1492, he received from Sultan Bajazet the
       precious Relic of the Most Holy Lance with which Our Redeemer had been wounded by S.
       Longinus upon the Cross. A Turkish emir brought the Relic to Ancona, whence it was conveyed
       by the Bishop to Narni, when two Cardinals took charge of it and carried it to Rome. On 31 May
       Cardinal Hiulino della Rovere solemnly handed it in a crystal vessel to the Pope during a function
       at S. Maria del Popolo. It was then borne in procession to S. Peter's, and from the loggia of the
       protico the Holy Father bestowed his blessing upon the crowds, whilst the Cardinal della Rovere
       standing at his side exposed the Sacred Relic to the veneration of the thronging piazza. The Holy
       Lance, which is accounted one of the three great Relics of the Passion, is shown together with the
       Piece of the True Cross and S. Veronica's Veil at S. Peter's after Matins on Spy Wednesday and on
       Good Friday evening; after High Mass on Easter Day, and also several times during the course of
       Maundy Thursday and Good Friday. The Relics are exposed from the balcony over the statue of S.
       Veronica to the left of the Papal Altar. The strepitaculum is sounded from the balcony and then all
       present venerate the Lance, the Wood of the Cross, and the Volto Santo.
             One of the most important exterior events which marked the reign of Innocent was
       undoubtedly the fall of Granada, the last stronghold of the Moors in Spain, which city surrendered


file:///C|/!!witch/mm00c6.html (2 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:54 PM]
Introduction of 1928 Edition - P.6

       to Ferdinand of Aragon, who thereby with his Queen Isabella won the name of “Catholic,” on 2
       January, 1492. The conquest of Granada was celebrated with public rejoicings and the most
       splendid fêtes at Rome. Every house was brilliant with candles; the expulsion of the
       Mohammedans was represented upon open stages in a kind of pantomime; and long processions
       visited the national church of Spain in the Piazza Navona, San Giacomo degli Spagnuoli, which
       had been erected in 1450.
             On 25 July, 1492, Pope Innocent, who had long been sickly and ailing so that his only
       nourishment for many weeks was woman's milk, passed away in his sleep at the Vatican. They
       buried him in S. Peter's, this great and noble Pontiff, and upon his tomb, a work in bronze by
       Pollaiuolo, were inscribed the felicitous words: Ego autem in Innocentia mea ingressus sum.
             The chroniclers or rather scandalmongers of the day, Burchard and Infessura, have done their
       best to draw the character of Innocent VIII in very black and shameful colours, and it is to be
       regretted that more than one historian has not only taken his cure from their odious insinuations
       and evil gossip, but yet further elaborated the story by his own lurid imagination. When we add
       thereto and retail as sober evidence the venom of contemporary satirists such as Marullo and the
       fertile exaggerations of melodramatic publicists such as Egidio of Viterbo, a very sensational
       grotesque is the result. During his youth Giovanni Battista Cibò had, it seems, become enamoured
       of a Neapolitan lady, by whom he was the father of two children, Franceschetto and Teodorina. As
       was proper, both son and daughter were provided for in an ample and munificent manner; in 1488
       his father married Franceschetto to Maddalena, a daughter of Lorenzo de’ Medici. The lady
       Teodorina became the bride of Messer Gherardo Uso de’ Mare, a Genoese merchant of great
       wealth, who was also Papal Treasurer. The capital that has been made out of these circumstances is
       hardly to be believed. It is admitted that this is contrary to strict morality and to be reasonably
       blamed. But this intrigue has been taken as the grounds for accusations of the most unbridled
       licentiousness, the tale of a lewd and lustful life. So far as I am aware the only other evidence for
       anything of the kind is the mud thrown by obscure writers at a great and truly Christian, if not
       wholly blameless, successor of S. Peter.
             In spite of these few faults Innocent VIII was a Pontiff who at a most difficult time worthily
       filled his Apostolic dignity. In his public office his constant endeavours for peace; his tireless
       efforts to unite Christendom against their common foe, the Turk; his opposition to the
       revolutionary Hussites in Bohemia and the anarchical Waldenses, two sources of the gravest
       danger, must be esteemed as worthy of the highest praise. Could he have brought his labours to
       fruition Europe would in later ages have been spared many a conflict and many a disaster.
             Roscoe in reference to Innocent remarks: “The urbanity and mildness of his manners formed
       a striking contrast to the inflexible character of his predecessor.” And again: “If the character of
       Innocent were to be impartially weighed, the balance would incline, but with no very rapid motion,
       to the favourable side. His native disposition seems to have been mild and placable; but the
       disputed claims of the Roman See, which he conceived it to be his duty to enforce, led him into
       embarassments, from which he was with difficulty extricated, and which, without increasing his
       reputation, destroyed his repose.” We have here the judgement of a historian who is inclined to
       censure rather than to defend, and who certainly did not recognize, because he was incapable of
       appreciating, the almost overwhelming difficulties with which Innocent must needs contend if he
       were, as in conscience bound, to act as the chief Pastor of Christendom, a critical position which
       he needs must face and endeavour to control, although he were well aware that humanly speaking


file:///C|/!!witch/mm00c6.html (3 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:54 PM]
Introduction of 1928 Edition - P.6

       his efforts had no chance of success, whilst they cost him health and repose and gained him
       oppugnancy and misunderstanding.
             Immediately upon the receipt of the Bull, Summis desiderantes affectibus, in 1485, Fr. Henry
       Kramer commenced his crusade against witches at Innsbruck, but he was opposed on certain
       technical grounds by the Bishop of Brixen, nor was Duke Sigismund so ready to help the
       Inquisitors with the civil arm. In fact the prosecutions were, if not actually directed, at least largely
       controlled, by the episcopal authority; nor did the ordinary courts, as is so often supposed,
       invariably carry out the full sentence of the Holy Office. Not so very many years later, indeed, the
       civil power took full cognizance of any charges of witchcraft, and it was then that far more blood
       was spilled and far more fires blazed than ever in the days when Kramer and Sprenger were
       directing the trials. It should be borne in mind too that frequent disturbances, conspiracies of
       anarchists, and nascent Bolshevism showed that the district was rotted to the core, and the
       severities of Kramer and Sprenger were by no means so unwarranted as is generally supposed.
             On 6 June, 1474, Sprenger (Mag. Jacobus Sprenger) is mentioned as Prior of the Dominican
       house at Cologne, and on 8 February, 1479, he was present, as the socius of Gerhard von Elten, at
       the trial of John von Ruchratt of Wesel, who was found guilty of propagating the most subversive
       doctrines, and was sentenced to seclusion in the Augustinian monastery at Mainz, where he died in
       1481.
             Unfortunately full biographies of these two remarkable men, James Sprenger and Henry
       Kramer, have not been transmitted to us, but as many details have been succinctly collected in the
       Scriptores Ordinis Praedicatorum of Quétif and Echard, Paris, 1719, I have thought it convenient
       to transcribe the following accounts from that monumental work.
             F. Jacobus Sprenger (sub anno 1494). Fr. James Sprenger, a German by birth and a member
       of the community of the Dominican house at Cologne, greatly distinguished himself in his
       academic career at the University of that city. His name was widely known in the year 1468, when
       at the Chapter General of the Order which was held at Rome he was appointed Regent of Studies
       at the Formal House of Studies at Cologne, and the following is recorded in the statutes: Fr. James
       Sprenger is officially appointed to study and lecture upon the Sentences so that he may proceed to
       the degree of Master. A few years later, although he was yet quite a young man, since he had
       already proceeded Master, he was elected Prior and Regent of this same house, which important
       offices he held in the year 1475, and a little after, we are told, he was elected Provincial of the
       whole German Province. It was about this date that he was named by Sixtus IV General Inquisitor
       for Germany, and especially for the dioceses of Cologne and Mainz. He coadjutor was a Master of
       Sacred Theology, of the Cologne Convent, by name Fr. Gerard von Elten, who unfortunately died
       within a year or two. Pope Innocent VIII confirmed Fr. Sprenger in this office, and appointed Fr.
       Henry Kramer as his socius. Fr. Sprenger was especially distinguished on account of his burning
       and fearless zeal for the old faith, his vigilance, his constancy, his singleness and patience in
       correcting novel abuses and errors. We know that he was living in our house at Cologne at least as
       late as the year 1494, since the famous Benedictine Abbot John Trithemus refers to him in this
       year. It is most probable that he died and was buried among his brethren at Cologne. The following
       works are the fruit of his pen:
                                                                   Page 6 of 8




file:///C|/!!witch/mm00c6.html (4 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:54 PM]
Introduction of 1928 Edition - P.6

                                     Introduction to 1928 Edition continued . . .

                                                  Main Index


                                         “The Malleus Maleficarum” was transcribed by
                                              Wicasta Lovelace and Christie Rice.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/mm00c6.html (5 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:54 PM]
Notes

           1909.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192849.html [2002-01-20 12:04:55 PM]
Notes

           1917. There are, it should be remarked, many other writers of authority who conclusively
        traverse Canon Chevalier's thesis, but these are dismissed by Fr. Thurston as “comparatively few
        and unimportant.” One would be loath to charge him with deliberate suggestio falsi.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192850.html [2002-01-20 12:04:55 PM]
Notes

           “Loreto and the Holy House,” by the Rev. G. E. Phillips, p. 6.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192851.html [2002-01-20 12:04:55 PM]
Notes

           Feast, 15 November. In Austria Duplex primae classis cum octaua.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192852.html [2002-01-20 12:04:55 PM]
Notes

            On the second Friday in Lent was formerly kept the Feast of the Spear and Nails first granted
        by Innocent VI, 13 February, 1353, for Germany and Bohemia at the request of Charles IV. In
        some places the Feast was kept on the Friday after Low Sunday. It is now observed by certain
        religious families.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192853.html [2002-01-20 12:04:55 PM]
Notes

           Feast, 15 March. He is especially venerated at Mantua.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192854.html [2002-01-20 12:04:56 PM]
Notes

           It was restored less than fifty years ago. S. Maria di Monserrato, of which church S. Giacomo
        is Contitolare is now served by Spanish priests.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192855.html [2002-01-20 12:04:56 PM]
Notes

           The bride, her mother Clarice Orsini, and a magnificent retinue entered Rome on 3 November,
        1487; the marriage was celebrated at the Vatican, Sunday, 20 January, 1488.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192856.html [2002-01-20 12:04:56 PM]
Notes

           Burchard was only aware of two children of Innocent VIII. But Egidio of Viterbo wrote:
        “Primus pontificum filios filiasque palam ostentauit, primus eorum apertas fecit nuptias.” And
        there are the Epigrams of Marullo:
           Quid quaeris testes, sit mas an foemina Cibo?
            Respice natorum, pignora certa, gregem.
           Octo Nocens pueros genuit, totidemque puellas,
            Hunc merito poterit decere Roma patrem.
           It is hardly to be believed that these libels have been accepted as actual fact.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192857.html [2002-01-20 12:04:56 PM]
Notes

           “Lorenzo de’ Medici,” c. vi.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192858.html [2002-01-20 12:04:57 PM]
Notes

           “Leo the Tenth,” c. iii.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192859.html [2002-01-20 12:04:57 PM]
Notes

           Jansen, “History of the German People,” English translation, XVI, 249-51.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192860.html [2002-01-20 12:04:57 PM]
Notes

           In November, 1485, the Bishop required Fr. Kramer to leave the diocese of Brixen. At the
        beginning of Lent, 1486, the Bishop insists that Fr. Kramer shall no longer delay his departure.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192861.html [2002-01-20 12:04:57 PM]
Notes

           Born at Trittenheim on the Moselle, 1 February, 1462; died at Wülrzburg, 13 December, 1518.
        He took the monastic habit in 1482 at Sponheim, and here, owing to his love of books, he built up
        the renowned library. Having ruled as abbot for twenty-three years he sought a more retired and
        peaceful life, which he enjoyed as head of the Scottish house of S. James at Wülrzburg. Here he
        died aged fifty-five years. Only a part of his works, numbering more than eighty, have appeared in
        print. Many treat of the ascetical life, but some deal with classical literature and natural science.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192862.html [2002-01-20 12:04:57 PM]
Introduction of 1928 Edition - P.7


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM

                         INTRODUCTION TO 1928 EDITION
             1. The Paradoxes of John of Westphalia, which he preached from the pulpit at Worms,
       disproved and utterly refuted by two Masters of Sacred Theology, Fr. Gerard von Elten of Cologne
       and Fr. James Sprenger. Printed at Mainz, 1479.
             2. Malleus Maleficarum Maleficat & earum haeresim, ut framea potentissima conterens per
       F. Henricum Institoris & Jacobum Sprengerum Ord. Praedic. Inquisitores, which has run into
       many editions (see the notice of Fr. Henry Kramer). This book was translated into French as Le
       Maillet des Sorcières, Lyons, Stephanus Gueynard, 4to. See the Bibliothèque Françoise du
       Verdier.
             3. The institution and approbation of the Society of Confraternity of the Most Holy Rosary
       which was first erected at Cologne on 8 September in the year 1475, with an account of many
       graces and Miracles, as also of the indulgences which have been granted to this said
       Confraternity. I am uncertain whether he wrote and issued this book in Latin or in German, since I
       have never seen it, and it was certainly composed for the instruction and edification of the people.
       Moreover, it is reported that the following circumstances were the occasion of the found of this
       Society. In the year 1475, when Nuess was being besieged by Charles, Duke of Burgunday, with a
       vast army, and the town was on the very point of surrender, the magistrates and chief burghers of
       Cologne, fearing the danger which threatened their city, resorted in a body to Fr. James, who was
       then Prior of the Convent, and besought him that if he knew of any plan or device which might
       haply ward off this disaster, he would inform them of it and instruct them what was best to be
       done. Fr. James, having seriously debated the matter with the senior members of the house, replied
       that all were agreed there could be no more unfailing and present remedy than to fly to the help of
       the Blessed Virgin, and that the very best way of effecting this would be if they were not only to
       honour the Immaculate Mother of God by means of the Holy Rosary which had been propagated
       several years ago by Blessed Alan de la Roche, but that they should also institute and erect a
       Society and Confraternity, in which every man should enrol himself with the firm resolve of
       thenceforth zealously and exactly fulfilling with a devout mind the obligations that might be
       required by the rules of membership. This excellent plan recommended itself to all. On the feast of
       the Nativity of Our Lady (8 September) the Society was inaugurated and High Mass was sung;
       there was a solemn procession throughout the city; all enrolled themselves and were inscribed on
       the Register; they fulfilled their duties continually with the utmost fervor, and before long the
       reward of their devotion was granted to them, since peace was made between the Emperor
       Frederick IV and Charles the Bold, Duke of Burgandy. In the following year, 1476, Alexander
       Nanni de Maltesta, Bishop of Forli and legatus a latere from Sixtus IV, who was then residing at
       Cologne, solemnly approved the Confraternity and on 10 March enriched it with many
       indulgences. And this is the first of those societies which are known as the Rosary Confraternirty

file:///C|/!!witch/mm00c7.html (1 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:58 PM]
Introduction of 1928 Edition - P.7

       to be erected and approved by the Apostolic authority. For in a short time, being enriched with so
       many indulgences, and new privileges and benefice being bestowed upon them almost daily, they
       have spread everywhere and they are to be found in almost every town and city throughout the
       whole of Christendom. It is worthy of remark that on the very same day that this Confraternity was
       erected at Cologne, Blessed Alan de la Roche of blessed memory, the most eminent promoter of
       the devotion of the Holy Rosary, died at Rostock; and his beloved disciple, Fr. Michel François de
       l’Isle, who was sometime Master of Sacred Theology at Cologne, gave Fr. Sprenger the most
       valuable assistance when the Rosary was being established, as we have related above. The works
       of Fr. James Sprenger are well approved by many authors as well as Trithemius; since amongst
       others who have praised him highly we may mention Albert Leander, O.P.; Antony of Siena, O.P.;
       Fernandez in his Concert. & Isto. del Rosar, Lib. 4, cap. 1, fol. 127; Fontana in his Theatro &
       Monum. published at Altamura, 1481; and, of authors not belonging to our Order, Antonius
       Possevinus, S.J., Miraeus, Aegidius Gelenius in his De admirance Coloniae Agrippinae urbi
       Ubiorum Augustae magnitudine sacra & ciuli, Coloniae, 1645, 4to, p. 430; Dupin, and very many
       more.
             Of Henry Kramer, Jacques Quétif and Echard, Scriptores Ordini Praedicatorum, Paris, 1719,
       Vol. 1, pp. 896-97, sub anno 1500, give the following account: Fr. Henry Kramer (F. Henricus
       Institorus) was of German nationality and a member of the German Province. It is definitely
       certain the he was a Master of Sacred Theology, which holy science he publicly professed,
       although we have not been able to discover either in what town of Germany he was born, in what
       Universities he lectured, or in what house of the Order he was professed. He was, however, very
       greatly distinguished by he zeal for the Faith, which he most bravely and most strenuously
       defended both by his eloquence in the pulpit and on the printed page, and so when in those dark
       days various errors had begun to penetrate Germany, and witches with their horrid craft, foul
       sorceries, and devilish commerce were increasing on every side, Pope Innocent VIII, by Letters
       Apostolic which were given at Rome at S. Peter's in the first year of his reign, 1484, appointed
       Henry Kramer and James Sprenger, Professors of Sacred Theology, general Inquisitors for all the
       dioceses of the five metropolitan churches of Germany, that is to say, Mainz, Cologne, Trèves,
       Salzburg, and Bremen. They showed themselves most zealous in the work which they had to do,
       and especially did they make inquisition for witches and for those who were gravely suspect of
       sorcery, all of whom they prosecuted with the extremest rigour of the law. Maximilian I, Emperor
       of Germany and King of the Romans, by royal letters patent which he signed at Brussels on 6
       November, 1486, bestowed upon Fr. Kramer and Fr. Sprenger the enjoyment of full civil powers
       in the performance of their duties as Inquisitors, and he commanded that throughout his dominions
       all should obey the two delegates of the Holy Office in their business, and should be ready and
       willing to help them upon every occasion. For several years Fr. Henry Kramer was Spiritual
       Director attached to our Church at Salzburg, which important office he fulfilled with singular great
       commendation. Thence he was summoned in the year 1495 to Venice by the Master-General of the
       Order, Fr. Joaquin de Torres, in order that he might give public lectures, and hold disputations
       concerning public worship and the adoration of the Most Holy Sacrament. For there were some
       theologians about this date who taught that the Blessed Sacrament must only be worshipped
       conditionally, with an implicit and intellectual reservation of adoring the Host in the tabernacle
       only in so far as It had been duly and exactly consecrated. Fr. Kramer, whose disputations were
       honoured by the presence of the Patriarch of Venice, with the utmost fervour publicly confronted
       those who maintained this view, and not infrequently did he preach against them from the pulpit.

file:///C|/!!witch/mm00c7.html (2 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:58 PM]
Introduction of 1928 Edition - P.7

       The whole question had recently arisen from a certain circumstance which happened in the vicinity
       of Padua. When a country fellow was collecting wood and dry leaves in a little copse hard by the
       city he found, wrapped up in a linen cloth beneath some dry brambles and bracken and dead
       branches of trees, two pyxes or ciboria containing particles which some three years before had
       been stolen from a neighbouring church, the one of which was used to carry the Lord's Body to the
       sick, the other being provided for the exposition of the Sanctissimum on the feast of Corpus
       Christi. The rustic immediately reported what he had discovered to the parish priest of the chapel
       hard by the spinnery. The good Father immediately hastened to the spot and saw that it was
       exactly as had been told him. When he more closely examined the vessels he found in one pyx a
       number of Hosts, and so fetching thither from the church a consecrated altar-stone which it was the
       custom to carry when the Viaticum was taken to the dying in order that the ciborium might be
       decently set thereon, he covered the stone with a corporal or a friar linen cloth and reverently
       placed it beneath the pyx. He built all around a little wooden baldaquin or shrine, and presently put
       devout persons to watch the place so that no indignity might be done. Meanwhile the incident had
       been noised abroad and vast throngs of people made their way to the place where the thicket was;
       candles were lighted all around; “Christ's Body,” they cry, “is here”; and every knee bent in
       humblest adoration. Before long news of the event was reported to the Bishop of Padua, who,
       having sent thither tow or three priests, inquired most carefully into every detail. Since in the other
       ciborium they only found some corrupted particles of the Sacramental Species, in the sight of the
       whole multitude the clerics who had come from the Bishop broke down the tiny tabernacle that
       had been improvised, scattered all the boughs and leafery which were arranged about it,
       extinguished the tapers, and carried the sacred vessels away with them. Immediately after it was
       forbidden under severest penalties of ecclesiastical censures and excommunication itself for
       anyone to visit that spot or to offer devotions there. Moreover, upon this occasion certain priests
       preached openly that the people who resorted thither had committed idolatry, that they had
       worshipped nothing else save brambles and decay, trees, nay, some went so far as to declare that
       they had adored the devil himself. As might be supposed, very grave contentions were set astir
       between the parish priests and their flocks, and it was sharply argued whether the people had
       sinned by their devotion to Christ's Body, Which they sincerely believed to be there, but Which (it
       seems) perhaps was not there: and the question was then mooted whether a man ought not to
       worship the Blessed Sacrament, ay, even when Christ's Body is consecrated in the Holy Sacrifice
       of the Mass and elevated and carried as Viaticum in procession to the sick, only conditionally, that
       is to say, since he does not perhaps know if It is actually Christ's Body (or whether some accident
       may not have occurred), since no mane can claim to be individually enlightened to by God on this
       point and desire to have the Mystery demonstrated and proved to him. It was much about the same
       thing that Fr. Kramer undertook to refute and utterly disprove the bold and wicked theories put
       forward by another preacher who at Augsburg dared to proclaim from the pulpit that the Catholic
       Church had not definitely laid down that the appearances of Christ in His human body, and
       sometimes bleeding from His Sacred Wounds, in the Blessed Sacrament are real and true
       manifestations of Our Saviour, but that it may be disputed whether Our Lord is truly there and
       truly to be worshipped by the people. This wretch even went so far as to say that miracles of this
       kind should be left as it were to the good judgement of God, inasmuch as with regard to these
       miraculous appearances nothing had been strictly defined by the Church, nor yet do the Holy
       Fathers or Doctors lay down and sure and certain rule. These doctrines Fr. Kramer opposed with
       the utmost zeal and learning, delivering many an eloquent sermon against the innovator and utterly


file:///C|/!!witch/mm00c7.html (3 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:58 PM]
Introduction of 1928 Edition - P.7

       condemning the theories which had been thus put forth and proclaimed. Nay, more, by virtue of
       his position and his powers as delegate of the Holy Office he forbade under the pain of
       excommunication that anyone should ever again dare to preach such errors. Fr. Kramer wrote
       several works, of which some have been more than once reprinted:
            1. Malleus Maleficarum Maleficas & earum haeresim, ut framea potentissima conterens per
       F. Henricum Institorem & Jacobum Sprengerem ord. Praed. Inquisitores, Lyons, Junta, 1484. This
       edition is highly praised by Fontana in his work De Monumentis. Another edition was published at
       Paris, apud Joannem Paruum, 8vo; also at Cologne, apud Joanem Gymnicium, 8vo, 1520; and
       another edition apud Nicolaum Bassaeum at Frankfort, 8vo, 1580 and 1582 (also two vols., 12mo,
       1588). The editions of 1520, 1580, and 1582 are to be found in the Royal Library, Nos. 2882,
       2883, and 2884. The editions printed at Venice in 1576 and at Lyons in 1620 are highly praised by
       Dupin. The latest edition is published at Lyons, Sumptibus Claudi Bourgeat, 4 vols., 1669. The
       Malleus Maleficarum, when submitted by the authors to the University of Cologne was officially
       approved by all the Doctors of the Theological Faculty on 9 May, 1487.
            2. Several Discourses and various sermons against the four errors which have newly arisen
       with regard to the Most Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, now collected and brought together by
       the Professor of Scripture of the Church of Salzburg, Brother Henry Kramer, of the Order of
       Preachers, General Inquisitor of heretical pravity. Published at Nuremburg by Antony Joberger,
       4to, 1496. This work is divided into three parts:
              The First Part. A Tractate against the errors of the preacher who taught that Christ was only
              to be conditionally worshipped in the Blessed Sacrament: A Reply to the objection raised by
              this preacher, and XI sermons on the Blessed Sacrament.
              The Second Part. XIX Sermons on the Blessed Sacrament.
              The Third Part.
                  1. Further Six Sermons on the Sacrament.
                  2. Advice and cautels for priests.
                  3. A little Treatise concerning the miraculous Host and the species of Blood which have
                     been reserved for the space of 300 years at Augsburg, or a sharp confutation of the
                     error which asserts that the miraculous Sacrament if the Eucharist, whilst there is the
                     appearance in the Host of Blood or Human Flesh or the form of a Figure, is not truly
                     the Blessed Sacrament, with the promulgation of the Ban of Excommunication against
                     all and sundry who dare to entertain this opinion. A copy of this book may be found
                     at Paris in the library of our monastery of S. Honorat.

             In was about the same time, 1497-98, that certain refractory and unruly spirits took great
       exception against the censure which the Bishop of Trèves, who was a legatus de latere from the
       Apostolic See, and the Patriarch of Venice has pronounced on Antonio degli Roselli of Arezzo and
       his book De Monarchia siue de potestate imperatoris, and since these rash men openly averred
       that the censure and condemnation of this work had not been brought about in any just or legal
       way, Fr. Henry was requested by Don Antoni de’ Pizamanni, a patrician of Venice, who was also a
       Doctor of Sacred Theology, to write a tractate impugning this said book of Antonio degli Roselli.
       Accordingly Fr. Kramer composed his opuscule with the following title:
                                                                   Page 7 of 8


file:///C|/!!witch/mm00c7.html (4 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:58 PM]
Introduction of 1928 Edition - P.7




                                     Introduction to 1928 Edition continued . . .

                                                  Main Index


                                         “The Malleus Maleficarum” was transcribed by
                                              Wicasta Lovelace and Christie Rice.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/mm00c7.html (5 of 5) [2002-01-20 12:04:58 PM]
Notes

          “The Hammer of Witches which destroyeth Witches and their heresy as with a two-edged
        sword,” by Fr. Henry Kramer and Fr. James Sprenger, of the Order of Preachers, Inquisitors.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192863.html [2002-01-20 12:04:58 PM]
Notes

           An edition which cannot be traced. See the Note upon the Bibliography.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192864.html [2002-01-20 12:04:59 PM]
A Note Upon the Bibliography


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM

                      A NOTE UPON THE BIBLIOGRAPHY
            The Bibliography of the Malleus Maleficarum is extremely intricate and difficult, as many of
       the earlier editions both folio and quarto are without place or date. Thus the British Museum
       possesses a copy (Press-Mark 1 B, 1606), folio, which in the catalogue stands as “1485?”, but this
       can hardly be correct. The British Museum has five editions of the fifteenth century: 4to, 1490?
       (IA 8634); folio, 1490 (IB 8615); 4to, 1494 (IA 7468); folio, 1494 (IB 5064); 4to, 1496 (IA 7503).
            Graesse, Bibliotheca Magica, Leipzig, 1843, gives the editions of the fifteenth century as
       Nuremberg, both 4to and folio, 1494 and 1496. He also mentions an early folio and an early 4to
       without date or place. He further records a 4to published at Cologne in 1489, and a folio published
       at Cologne, 1494.
            Malleus Maleficarum, 8vo, Paris, an edition to which the British Museum catalogue assigns
       the date of “1510?”.
            Malleus Maleficarum, 8vo, “Colonie. Per me Henricü de Nussia,” 1511.
            Malleus Maleficarum, 8vo, Coloniae, J. Gymnicus, 1520. (Copies of these two Cologne
       editions are in the British Museum.)
            Malleus Maleficarum . . . per F. Raffaelum Maffeum Venetum et D. Jacobi a Judeca instituti
       Seruorum summo studio illustratis et a multis erroribus vindicatus . . . Venetiis Ad Candentis
       Salamandrae insigne. MD. LXXVI, 8vo. (This is a disappointing reprint, and it is difficult to see in
       what consisted the editorial care of the Servite Raffaelo Maffei, who may or may not have been
       some relation of the famous humanist of the same name (d. 25 January, 1522), and who was of the
       monastery of San Giacomo della Guidecca. He might have produced a critical edition of the
       greatest value, but as it is there are no glosses, there is no excursus, and the text is poor. For
       example, in a very difficult passage, Principalis Quaestio II, Pars II, where the earliest texts read
       “die dominico sotularia iuuenum fungia . . . perungunt,” Venice, 1576, has “die dominica sotularia
       iuuenum fungia . . . perungent.”)
            Malleus Maleficarum, Impressum Francofurti as Moenum apud Nicolaum Bassaeum . . . 8vo,
       1580.
            Malleus Maleficarum, . . . Francofurti . . . apud Nicolaum Bassaeum . . . 8vo, 1582.
            Malleus Maleficarum, . . . Francofurti . . . apud Nicolaum Bassaeum, 2 vols., 8bo, 1588. This
       edition also contains in Vol. I extracts from Nider's Formicarius. Vol. II, which is dedicated to
       John Mündzenberg, Prior of the Carmelite House at Frankfort, contains the following nine
       Tractates:
            Bernard Basin, De artibus magicis. (1482.)
            Ulrich Molitor, De lamiis. (1489.)
            Girolamo Menghi, O.S.F.C., Flagellum Daemonum. (1578.)
            John Gerson, De probatione Spirituum. (circa 1404.)
            Thomas Murner, O.M., De Pythonico contractu. (1499.)

file:///C|/!!witch/mm00d.html (1 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:59 PM]
A Note Upon the Bibliography

            Felix Hemmerlin, De exorcismis. (circa 1445.)
            Eiusdem, De credulitate Daemonibus adhibenda. (1454.)
            Bartolomeo Spina, O.P., De strigibus. (1523.)
            Eiusdem, Apologiae III aduersus Ioann. Franc. Ponzinibum. (1525.)
            The title-page announces that these works are “Omnes de integro nunc demum in ordinem
       congestos, notis & explicationibus illustratos, atque ab innumeris quibus ad nauseam usque
       scatebant mendis in usum communem uindicatos.” It is true that the earlier editions did swarm
       with errors, and some of these blemishes have been duly corrected, but there still remains much to
       be done in the way of emendation. It is to be wished that even the little care given to Vol. II had
       been bestowed on the text of the Malleus Maleficarum in Vol. I, for this is very poor and faulty.
            Malleus Maleficarum, Lyons, 8vo, 1595. (Graesse.)
            Malleus Maleficarum, Friburg, 1598.
            Malleus Maleficarum, Lyons, 8vo, 1600.
            Malleus Maleficarum, Lyons, “multo auctior,” 8vo, 1620.
            Malleus Maleficarum, Friburg, 8vo, 1660.
            Malleus Maleficarum, 4to, Lyons, 1666. (Graesse.)
            Malleus Maleficarum, 4 vols., “sumptibus Claudii Bourgeat,” 4to, Lyons, 1669. This would
       appear to be the latest edition of the Malleus Maleficarum, and the test has here and there received
       some revision. For example, in the passage to which reference has already been made, Principalis
       Quaestio II, Pars II, where the former reading was “sotularia iuuenum fungia . . . perungent,” we
       have the correct “axungia” instead of “fungia.” I have given in the Introduction a list of the
       collections contained in these four noble volumes.
            Quétif-Echard, Scriptores Ordinis Praedicatorum, 2 vols., Paris, 1719, Vol. I, p 881, mention
       a French translation of the Malleus Maleficarum, Le Maillet des Sorcières, as having been
       published, quarto, at Lyons by Stephanus Gueynard. No date, however, is given, and as this book
       cannot be traced, it seems highly probable that one of the many Lyons reprints of the Malleus
       Maleficarum was mistakenly supposed to be a French rendering of the original. In answer to my
       inquiries M. le Directeur of the Bibliothèque Nationale has kindly informed me: “L’ouvrage de
       Sprenger, Le Maillet des Sorcières, édition de Lyon, ne se trouve point à la Bibliothèque
       Nationale. Mais, de plus, je me suis reporté à l’excellente bibliographie lyonnaise de Baudrier, XIª
       série, 1914, et là non plus, l’édition de Stephanus Gueynard ne se trouve point.” Le Maillet des
       Sorcières, 4to, Lyons, by Stephanus Gueynard, does not occur in the valuable Essai d“une
       Bibliographis Franéaise mèthodique et raisonnée de la Sorcellerie of R. Yve-Plessis, Paris, 1900.
            There is a modern German translation of the Malleus Maleficarum by J. W. R. Schmidt, Der
       Hexenhammer, 3 vols., Berlin, 1906; second edition, 1922-3.
            In 1912 Oswald Weigel, the famous “Antiquariat & Auktions-Institut” of Leipzig, sold an
       exceptionally fine, if not - should it be once permissable to use a much over-looked word - a
       unique collection of books dealing with witchcraft. This library contained no fewer than
       twenty-nine exemplars of the Malleus Maleficarum, of which the dates were catalogues as follows:
       (1) Argentorati (Strasburg), J. Prüss, ca. 1487. (2) Spirae, Peter Drach, ca. 1487. (3) Spirae, Peter
       Drach, ca. 1490; or Basle, J. von Amorbach, ca. 1490?. (4) No place nor date. With inscription
       “Codex moasterij scti Martini prope Treuirum.” (5) Küln, J. Koelhoff, 1494. (6) Nürnberg, Anton
       Koberger, 1494. (7) Nürnberg, Anton Koberger, 1496. (8) [Paris], Jehan Petit, ca. 1497. (9) Cüln,
       Henricus de Nussia, 1511. (10) [Paris, Jehan Petit, no date.] (11) Lyon, J. Marion, 1519. (12)
       Nürnberg, Frederick Peypus, 1519. (13) Küln, J. Gymnicus, 1520. (14) Venetiis, Io. Antonius


file:///C|/!!witch/mm00d.html (2 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:59 PM]
A Note Upon the Bibliography

       Bertanus, 1574. (15) Ventiis, ibid., 1576. (16) Francofurti, apud Nicolaum Bassaeum, 1580. (17)
       Francofurti, ibid., 1582. (18) Lugduni, apud Ioannam Iacobi Iuntae, 2 tomi, 1584. In this edition
       the title is misprinted Malleus Maleficorum. (19) Francofurti, Sumptibus Nicolai Bassaei, 1588.
       (20) Duplicate of 19. (21) Lugduni, Petri Landry, 2 tomi, 1595. (22) Francofurti, Sumptibus
       Nicolai Bassaei, 2 tomi, 1600. (23) Lugduni, Sumptibus Petry Landry, 3 tomi, 1604. (24) Lugduni,
       ibid., 1614. (25) Lugduni, ibid., 1615. (26) Lugduni, Sumptibus Clavdii Landry, 3 tomi, 1620. (27)
       Lugduni, 3 tomi, 1620-21. (28) Lugduni, 4 tomi, 1669. (29) The modern German translation of the
       Malleus Maleficarum by J. W. R. Schmidt, Der Hexenhammer, 3 vols., Berlin, 1906.

                                                  Main Index


                                         “The Malleus Maleficarum” was transcribed by
                                              Wicasta Lovelace and Christie Rice.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/mm00d.html (3 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:04:59 PM]
Notes

           Jules Baissac, “Les grands Jours de la Sorcellerie,” 1890, p. 19, says - I do not know on what
        authority - “La 1re édition du ‘Malleus Maleficarum’ est de 1489, in - 4, Cologne, cinq ans après
        la publication de la Bulle Summis desiderantes.”




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n00d1.html [2002-01-20 12:04:59 PM]
Notes

             Axis-ungo. See Palladius, 1, xvii, 3. Also Vegetius, “De Arte Ueterinaria,” IV, x, 3; also IV, xii,
        3.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n00d2.html [2002-01-20 12:05:00 PM]
Notes

           1433-77. In 1467 he succeeded to the Dukedom of Burgundy on the death of his father, Philip
        the Good.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192865.html [2002-01-20 12:05:00 PM]
Notes

           Alanus de Rupe, born about 1428; died at Zwolle in Holland, 8 September, 1475. Early in life
        he entered the Dominican Order, and after a distinguished academic career, preached throughout
        Northern France, Flanders, and the Netherlands with intensest enthusiasm, his special mission
        being the re-establishment everywhere of the Holy Rosary. His vision of the Rosary is generally
        assigned to the year 1460. The “Petite Année Dominicaine” (Rome, 1911, p. 309) says: “Il fut le
        grand prédicateur des vertus de la T.-Ste-Vierge au XVe siècle et le restaurateur du St. Rosaire.
        Car . . . une dévotion si rationelle, si facile, si attrayante, si utile, inaugerée par un aussi grand
        saint que Dominique était tombée presque partout dans l’oubli. Alains se mit à l’æuvre . . . faisant
        renaître avec la culture du Rosaire, les fruits de grâce. . . . Sa mort était celle d’un saint, et son
        tombeau devint glorieux par de nombreux miracles. Un autel lui était dédié dans le couvent de
        Dinan, et le B. Grignon de Montefort aimait à y dire la messe.”




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192866.html [2002-01-20 12:05:00 PM]
Notes

           The legati a latere are cardinals set by the Pope on extraordinary missions or as temporary
        representatives.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192867.html [2002-01-20 12:05:00 PM]
Notes

           The Archbishop Rupprecht von der Pfalz (1463-80) was forcibly pressing his rights as temporal
        lord, an action which gave rise to considerable violence and much fighting throughout the
        territory.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192868.html [2002-01-20 12:05:00 PM]
Notes

           The Devotion itself was revealed by Our Lady to S. Dominic. Although perhaps no actual
        Confraternities had been granted indulgences before 1475-6, yet there were Dominican Guilds
        and Fraternities which foster this Crown of Prayers.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192869.html [2002-01-20 12:05:01 PM]
Notes

           In 1486 a priest in London writes to his patron in Yorkshire: “I send a paper of the Rosary of
        Our Lady of Coleyn, and I have registered your name with both my Ladis names, as the paper
        expresses, and ye be acopled as brethren and sisters.” “Plumpton Correspondence” (Camden
        Society, p. 50).




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192870.html [2002-01-20 12:05:01 PM]
Notes

           Later authorities say Zwolle in Holland.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192871.html [2002-01-20 12:05:01 PM]
Notes

           Michel François de l’Isle, O.P., Bishop of Selymria, born circa 1435; died 2 June, 1502. In
        1488 this famous theologian was Regent of Studies at Cologne. An ample biography may be found
        in Quétif-Echard, “Scriptores Ordinis Praedicatorum,” Paris, 1719, sub anno 1502, Vol. II. pp.
        7-9. Selymbria, or Selybria, is a titular see in Thracia Prima, suffragan of Heraclea.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192872.html [2002-01-20 12:05:01 PM]
Notes

           He was the socius of Francis Silvester, O.P., of Ferrara, a celebrated theologian, who was
        born circa 1474, and died at Rennes, 19 September, 1526.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192873.html [2002-01-20 12:05:02 PM]
Notes

           Lusitanus, born near Braga in Portugal; died at Naples, 2 January, 1585. The praise of
        Sprenger may be found in his “Bibliotheca Ordinis Praedicatorum.” He is called “of Siena”
        because of his great devotion to S. Catherine of Siena.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192874.html [2002-01-20 12:05:02 PM]
Notes

           Theologian and papal envoy. Born at Mantua in 1533 or 1534; died at Ferrara, 26 February,
        1611. His many writings include “Moscovia,” Vilna, 1586, an important work on Russian history;
        “Del Sacrificio della Messa,” Lyons, 1563; “Apparatus sacer ad Scripturam Ueteris et Noui
        Test.,” Venice, 1603-6; “Il soldato cristiano,” Rome, 1569; and a “Bibliotheca Selecta,” Rome,
        1593.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192875.html [2002-01-20 12:05:02 PM]
Notes

           Albert Le Mire, ecclesiastical historian, born at Brussels, 30 November, 1573; died at Antwerp,
        19 October, 1640. He wa a canon of Antwerp Cathedral, and in 1624 he became Dean of the
        chapter and Vicar-general of the diocese. He has left thirty-nine vast works on profane,
        ecclesiastical, and monastic history. See De Riddler's “Aubert Le Mire, sa vie, sas écrits,
        meémoire historique et critique,” Paris, 1865.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192876.html [2002-01-20 12:05:02 PM]
Notes

           Louis-Ellies Dupin, born 17 June, 1657; died 6 June, 1719. He wrote at great length upon the
        Fathers, many of whose works he edited with commentaries. Some of his statements involved him
        in disputes with Dom. Petit-Didier and later with Bossuet. Dupin is an extremely prolific author,
        but several of his propsitions were regarded as suspect in orthodoxy.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192877.html [2002-01-20 12:05:02 PM]
Notes

           In 1457 Pope Nicholas V, upon the death of Domenico Michel, Patriarch of Castello,
        incorporating them both by the terms of the Bull “Regis aeterni” in the new Patriarchate of
        Venice, and thus Venice succeeded to the whole metropolitan jurisdiction of Grado, including the
        see of Dalmatia.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192878.html [2002-01-20 12:05:03 PM]
Notes

           Jacopo Zeno, nephew and biographer of the famous Venetian admiral, Carlo Zeno.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192879.html [2002-01-20 12:05:03 PM]
Notes

           It is remarkable that at the very moment similar controversies are raised about the Blessed
        Sacrament. The words “Real Presence” are freely bandied. This is a popular phrase, since it may
        mean anything or nothing. It is far better to save all ambiguity, and to say, “The Blessed
        Sacrament is God.” One writer, professing himself a Christian, declares that it is at least doubtful
        whether Our Lord instituted The Holy Sacrifice of the Altar. This, of course, is tantamount to a
        denial of Christ.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192880.html [2002-01-20 12:05:03 PM]
Notes

           It must suffice to mention only a few of the many Saints who have seen Our Lord in the Blessed
        Sacrament. S. Veronica of Binasco, the Augustinian, saw Him there with her bodily eyes, whilst
        the Host was environed by adoring Angels. Vaulem the Cistercian saw in the Host the Infant Jesus,
        Who held a crown of gold adorned with precious stones. When Peter of Toulouse was holding the
        Host over the chalice at Mass the Bambino of marvellous beauty appeared between his fingers.
        The same thing happened every morning for two or three months. Similarly Our Lord was seen by
        S. Angela of Flogno; S. Hugh of Cluny; S. Lydwine; S. Ignatius; S. Joseph of Cupertino; Domenica
        of Paradise; Teresa de la Cerda, O.S.D., who saw the Infant Jesus lying on the corporal; and very
        many more. S. Catherine of Siena saw Our Lord in the Blessed Sacrament under different forms,
        and at the fraction of the Host she saw how He remained entired in each part. Mary of Oignies at
        the elevation in Passion-Tide saw Our Lord upon the Cross; at Christmas Our Lady appeared in
        the Host carrying the Infant Jesus in her arms. In the Cathedral at Orvieto I have venerated the
        Corporale which is stained with blood that fell from the Host when a young priest who doubted
        was saying Mass. This happened in the days of Pope Urban IV, who reigned 1261-64.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192881.html [2002-01-20 12:05:03 PM]
Notes

           This can hardly be correct.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192882.html [2002-01-20 12:05:04 PM]
Notes

           The contents of this valuable collection are as follows:
           Vol. I:
            Nider, O.P., John. Formicarius de maleficiis.
            Sprenger and Kramer. Malleus Maleficarum.
           Vol. II:
            Anania, Giovanni Lorenzo. De Natura Daemonum.
            Basin, Bernard. De Artibus magicis.
            Bernard of Como, O.P. De Strigibus. (With the annotations of Frencesco Peña.)
            Castro, O.M., Alfonso A. De impia Sortilegarum haeresi.
            De Vignate, Ambrose. Quaestio de Lamiis. (With a commentary by Peña.)
            Gerson, John. De Probatione Spirituum. De erroribus circa artem magicam reprobatis.
            Grilland, Paul. De Sortilegiis.
            Leone, Giovanni Francesco. De Sortilegiis.
            Moliter, Ulrich. De Pythonicis mulieribus.
            Murner, O.M., Thomas. De Pythonico Contractu.
            Simancus, Iago. De Lamiis.
            Spina, O.P., Bartolomeo. De Strigibus. In Ponzinibium de Lamiis Apologia.
           Vol. III:
            Gorichen, Heinrich De. De superstitionis quibusdam casibus.
            Mamor, Pietro. Flagellum maleficorum.
            Menghi, Girolamo, Capuchin. Flagellum Daemonum. Fustis Daemonum.
            Stampa, Pietro Antonio. Fuga Satanae.
           Vol. IV:
            Ars exorcistica tribus partibus.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192883.html [2002-01-20 12:05:04 PM]
Notes

          This great Saint is much honoured in France. Hw was Archbishop of Arles, and founder of the
        monastery of Lérins. Born about 350, he died in January, 429.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192884.html [2002-01-20 12:05:04 PM]
Notes

           John II, Margrave of Baden.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192885.html [2002-01-20 12:05:04 PM]
Introduction of 1928 Edition - P.8


                                 THE
                         MALLEUS MALEFICARUM

                         INTRODUCTION TO 1928 EDITION
             3. Here beginneth a Tractate confuting the errors of Master Antonio degli Roselli of Padua,
       jurisconsult, concerning the plenary power of the Supreme Pontiff and the power of a temporal
       monarch. The conclusion is as follows: Here endeth the Reply of the Inquisitor-General of
       Germany, Fr. Henry Kramer, in answer to the erroneous and mistaken opinions of Antonio degli
       Roselli. Printed at Venice, at the Press of Giacomo de Lencho, at the charge of Peter Liechtenstein,
       27 July, 1499.
             4. The Shield of Defence of the Holy Roman Church against the Picards and Waldenses. This
       was published when Fr. Kramer was acting as Censor of the Faith under Alexander VI in Bohemia
       and Moldavia. This work is praised by the famous Dominican writer Noel Alexandre in his Selecta
       historiae ecclesiasticae capita et in loca eiusdem insignia dissertationes historicae, criticae,
       dogmaticae. In dealing with the fifteenth century he quotes passages from this work. The
       bibliographer Beugheim catalogues an edition of this work among those Incunabula the exact date
       of which cannot be traced. Georg Simpler, who was Rector of the University of Pforzheim, and
       afterwards Professor of Jurisprudence of Tubingen in the early decades of the sixteenth century,
       also mentions this work with commendation. Odorico Rinaldi quotes from this work in his Annales
       under the year 1500. The Sermons of 1496 are highly praised by Antony of Siena, O.P. Antonius
       Possevinus, S.J., speaks of a treatise Against the Errors of Witches. This I have never seen, but I
       feel very well assured that it is no other work than the Malleus Maleficarum, which was written in
       collaboration with Fr. James Sprenger, and which we have spoken above in some detail.
             In what year Fr. Henry Kramer died and to what house of the Order he was then attached is
       not recorded, but it seems certain that he was living at least as late as 1500.
             Thus Quétif-Echard, but we may not impertinently add a few, from several, formal references
       which occur in Dominican registers and archives. James Sprenger was born at Basel (he is called
       de Basilea in a MS. belonging to the Library of Basel), probably about 1436038, and he was
       admitted as a Dominican novice in 1452 at the convent of his native town. An extract “ex
       monumentis contuent. Coloniens.” says that Sprenger “beatus anno 1495 obiit Argentinae ad S.
       Nicolaum in Undis in conuentu sororum ordinis nostri.” Another account relates that he did not die
       at Strasburg on 6 December, 1495, but at Verona, 3 February, 1503, and certainly Jacobus
       Magdalius in his Stichologia has “In mortem magistri Iacobi Sprenger, sacri ordinis praedicatorii
       per Theutoniam prouincialis, Elegia,” which commences:
              O utinam patrio recubassent ossa sepulchro
              Quae modo Zenonis urbe sepulta iacent.

       Henry Kramer, who appears in the Dominican registers as “Fr. Henricus Institoris de Sletstat,” was
       born about 1430. His later years were distinguished by the fervour of his apostolic missions in

file:///C|/!!witch/mm00c8.html (1 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:05:05 PM]
Introduction of 1928 Edition - P.8

       Bohemia, where he died in 1505.
             Although, as we have seeb, Fr. Henry Kramer and Fr. James Sprenger were men of many
       activities, it is by the Malleus Maleficarum that they will chiefly be remembered. There can be no
       doubt that this work had in its day and for a full couple of centuries an enormous influence. There
       are few demonologists and writers upon witchcraft who do not refer to its pages as an ultimate
       authority. It was continually quoted and appealed to in the witch-trials of Germany, France, Italy,
       and England; whilst the methods and examples of the two Inquisitors gained an even more
       extensive credit and sanction owing to their reproduction (sometimes without direct
       acknowledgement) in the works of Bedin, De Lancre, Boguet, Remy, Tartarotti, Elich, Grilland,
       Pons, Godelmann, de Moura, Oberlal, Cigogna, Peperni, Martinus Aries, Anania, Binsfeld,
       Bernard Basin, Menghi, Stampa, Clodius, Schelhammer, Wolf, Stegmann, Neissner, Voigt,
       Cattani, Ricardus, and a hundred more. King James has drawn (probably indirectly) much of his
       Daemonologie, in Forme of a Dialogue, Divided into three Bookes from the pages of the Malleus;
       and Thomas Shadwell, the Orance laureate, in his “Notes upon the Magick” of his famous play,
       The Lancashire Witches, continually quotes from the same source.
             To some there may seem much in the Malleus Maleficarum that is crude, much that is
       difficult. For example, the etymology will provoke a smile. The derivation of Femina from fe
       minus is notorious, and hardly less awkward is the statement that Diabolus comes “a Dia, quod est
       duo, et bolus, quod est morsellus; quia duo occidit, scilicet corpus et animam.” Yet I venture to say
       that these blemishes - such gross blunders, of you will - do not affect the real contexture and
       weight of this mighty treatise.
             Possibly what will seem even more amazing to modern readers is the misogynic trend of
       various passages, and these not of the briefest nor least pointed. However, exaggerated as these
       may be, I am not altogether certain that they will not prove a wholesome and needful antidote in
       this feministic age, when the sexes seem confounded, and it appear to be the chief object of many
       females to ape the man, an indecorum by which they not only divest themselves of such charm as
       they might boast, but lay themselves open to the sternest reprobation in the name of sanity and
       common-sense. For the Apostle S. Peter says: “Let wives be subject to their husbands: that if any
       believe not the word, they may be won without the word, by the conversation of the wives,
       considering your chaste conversation with fear. Whose adorning let it not be the outward plaiting
       of the hair, or the wearing of god, or the putting on of apparel; but the hidden man of the heart is
       the incorruptibility of a quiet and meek spirit, which is rich in the sight of God. For after the
       manner heretofore the holy women also, who trusted God, adorned themselves, being in subjection
       to their own husbands: as Sara obeyed Abraham, calling him lord: whose daughters you are, doing
       well, and not fearing any disturbance.”
             With regard to the sentences pronounced upon witches and the course of their trials, we may
       say that these things must be considered in reference and in proportion to the legal code of the age.
       Modern justice knows sentences of the most ferocious savagery, punishments which can only be
       dealt out by brutal vindictiveness, and these are often meted out to offences concerning which we
       may sometimes ask ourselves whether they are offences at all; they certainly do no harm to
       society, and no harm to the person. Witches were the bane of all social order; they injured not only
       persons but property. They were, in fact, as has previously been emphasized, the active members
       of a vast revolutionary body, a conspiracy against civilization. Any other save the most thorough
       measures must have been unavailing; worse, they must have but fanned the flame.
             And so in the years to come, when the Malleus Maleficarum was used as a standard

file:///C|/!!witch/mm00c8.html (2 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:05:05 PM]
Introduction of 1928 Edition - P.8

       text-book, supremely authoritative practice winnowed the little chaff, the etymologies, from the
       wheat of wisdom. Yet it is safe to say that the book is to-day scarcely known save by name. It has
       become a legend. Writer after writer, who had never turned the pages, felt himself at liberty to
       heap ridicule and abuse upon this venerable volume. He could quote - though he had never seen
       the text - an etymological absurdity or two, or if in more serious vein he could prate glibly enough
       of the publication of the Malleus Maleficarum as a “most disastrous episode.” He did not know
       very clearly what he meant, and the humbug trusted that nobody would stop to inquire. For the
       most part his confidence was respected; his word was taken.
             We must approach this great work - admirable in spite of its triffling blemishes - with open
       minds and grave intent; if we duly consider the world of confusion, of Bolshevism, of anarchy and
       licentiousness all around to-day, it should be an easy task for us to picture the difficulties, the
       hideous dangers with which Henry Kramer and James Sprenger were called to combat and to cope;
       we must be prepared to discount certain plain faults, certain awkwardnesses, certain roughness and
       even severities; and then shall we be in a position dispassionately and calmy to pronounce opinion
       upon the value and the merit of this famouse treatise.
             As for myself, I do not hesitate to record my judgement. Literary merits and graces, strictly
       speaking, were not the aim of the authors of the Malleus Maleficarum, although there are felicities
       not a few to be found in their admirable pages. Yet I dare not even hope that the flavour of Latinity
       is preserved in a translation which can hardly avoid being jejune and bare. The interest, then, lies
       in the subject-matter. And from this point of view the Malleus Maleficarum is one of the most
       pregnant and most interesting books I know in the library of its kind - a kind which, as it deals
       with eternal things, the eternal conflict of good and evil, must eternally capture the attention of all
       men who think, all who see, or are endeavouring to see, reality beyond the accidents of matter,
       time, and space.



              Montague Summers.
              In Festo Expectationis B.M.V.
                1927.
                                                                   Page 8 of 8


NOTA - To Dr. H.J. Norma I wish to express my grateful thanks for his kindness in having read through the proofs of the
 Malleus Maleficarum. Those who realize the labour and sacrifice of time such a task demands will best appreciate the
                                     value of such generous assistance. - M.S.


                                                  Main Index


                                         “The Malleus Maleficarum” was transcribed by
                                              Wicasta Lovelace and Christie Rice.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.



file:///C|/!!witch/mm00c8.html (3 of 3) [2002-01-20 12:05:05 PM]
Notes

           The extremer Picards seem to have been an offshoot of the Behgards and to have professed the
        Adamite heresy. They called their churches Paradise whilst engaged in common worship stripped
        themselves quite nude. Shameful disorders followed. A number of these fanatics took possession of
        an island in the river Nezarka and lived in open communism. In 1421 Ziska, the Hussite leader,
        practically exterminated the sect. There have, however, been sporadic outbreaks of these
        Neo-Adamites. Picards was also a name given to the “Bohemian Brethren,” who may be said to
        have been organized in 1457 by Gregory, the nephew of Rokyzana. They held very extreme views,
        denying that the Blessed Sacrament is the Body of Christ, advocating the abolition of all
        disctinctions of rank and fortune and the living in community. In the course of time these views
        were practically modified, and to-day they may be said to be represented by the Moravian Body.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192886.html [2002-01-20 12:05:05 PM]
Notes

           Reigned from 11 August, 1492, to 18 August, 1503.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192887.html [2002-01-20 12:05:05 PM]
Notes

           Born at Rouen 19 January, 1639; he entered the Dominican Order in that city, 9 May, 1655.
        His literary labours were very vast, and in 1677 he published at Paris the first volume of his huge
        “History.” Some passages were very sharply criticized, and even censured, but in the preface to
        the third edition (aris, 1699, 8 volumes, folio) the author, whilst fully submitting to the Holy See,
        tactfully defends himself. He died of old age in the convent of S. Jacques at Paris, 21 August, 1724.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192888.html [2002-01-20 12:05:05 PM]
Notes

           Oratorian, born at Treviso, 1595; died at Rome, 22 January, 1671. This eminent historian
        occupied himself with the continuation of the “Annales” of the Ven Cesare Baronio, and his work,
        which covers the years from 1198 to 1565, was published at Rome, 1646-77.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192889.html [2002-01-20 12:05:06 PM]
Notes

           In his “Bibliotheca Ordinis Praedicatorum.”




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192890.html [2002-01-20 12:05:06 PM]
Notes

           S. Zeno, Martyr, is the Patron of Verona, in which city a basilica, San Zenone, is dedicated in
        his honour. His feast is kept 12 April, and the Roman Martyrology tells us that he was a Bishop of
        Verona, put to death under the Emperor Gallienus.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192891.html [2002-01-20 12:05:06 PM]
Notes

           Edinburgh, 1597.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192892.html [2002-01-20 12:05:06 PM]
Notes

           4to, 1682. Produced at the Duke's Theatre, Dorset Garden, in the autumn (probably
        September) of 1681.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192893.html [2002-01-20 12:05:07 PM]
Notes

           The word is from fe—, feu—, =Grk.                     —   , to produce; whence fetus, fecundus, etc. Cf.
        Sanscrit bhuas, bhavas, to become. Also fi—o; fu—turus.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192894.html [2002-01-20 12:05:07 PM]
Notes

           The word is from                           = tradicere. So   , slander, enmity.   , the
        slanderer, the enemy; hence, Satan, the devil.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192895.html [2002-01-20 12:05:08 PM]
Notes

          For an excellent study of this most difficult and most painful subject see a valuable work by
        George Ives, “The History of Penal Methods,” 1914.




file:///C|/!!witch/notes/n192896.html [2002-01-20 12:05:08 PM]
Write Us


                                  THE
                          MALLEUS MALEFICARUM

                                     WRITE US!
                  Just fill out the form below, or send e-mail to
                          mail@malleusmaleficarum.org.
                Name :


                Your Email (if you want a response):


                Gender (optional):
                  Female Male
                How would you rate the Malleus Maleficarum's graphics & layout?
                  Very Good!

                    Check here to recieve update notices.
                How did you hear about the online Malleus Maleficarum? (optional)




                Comments or Suggestions:




                                                                    Submit   Reset




file:///C|/!!witch/forms/writeus.html (1 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:05:08 PM]
Write Us

                                                    Main Index


                                           “The Malleus Maleficarum” was transcribed by
                                                Wicasta Lovelace and Christie Rice.

                        HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2001 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                                All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/forms/writeus.html (2 of 2) [2002-01-20 12:05:08 PM]
Summation by Edo Nyland


                                THE
                        MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
                                 Summation of the Malleus Maleficarum by Edo Nyland.

             The Dominican monks Heinrich Kramer and James Sprenger assembled many fairy
       tales and magic stories, nightmares, hearsay, confessions and accusations and put this all
       together as factual information in what became the handbook for the witch hunters,
       examiners, torturers and executioners, called the Malleus Maleficarum, a title which was
       translated as Hammer of Witches. It was published in 1487, but two years previously the
       authors had secured a bull from Pope Innocent VIII, authorizing them to continue the witch
       hunt in the Alps which they had already instituted against the opposition from clergy and
       secular authorities. They reprinted the bull of December 5, 1484 to make it appear that the
       whole book enjoyed papal sanction.
             Anybody with a grudge or suspicion, very young children included, could accuse
       anyone of witchcraft and be listened to with attention; anyone who wanted someone else's
       property or wife could accuse; any loner, any old person living alone, anyone with a
       misformity, physical or mental problem was likely to be accused. Open hunting season was
       declared on women, especially herb gatherers, midwives, widows and spinsters. Women
       who had no man to supervise them were of course highly suspicious. It has been estimated
       by Dr. Marija Gimbutas, professor of archaeology at the University of California, that as
       many as 9 million people, overwhelmingly women, were burned or hanged during the
       witch-craze. For nearly 250 years the Witches' Hammer was the guidebook for the witch
       hunters, but again some of the inquisitioners had misgivings about this devilish book. In a
       letter dated November 27, 1538 Salazar advised the inquisitioners not to believe everything
       they read in Malleus Maleficarum, even if the authors write about it as something they
       themselves have seen and investigated (Henningson p.347).

       Excerpted from “The Witch Burnings - Holocaust Without Equal” by Edo Nyland.

       Edo Nyland's Homepage
       edonon@islandnet.com

                                                  Main Index


                                         “The Malleus Maleficarum” was transcribed by
                                              Wicasta Lovelace and Christie Rice.

                       HTML Scripting Copyright © 1998-2000 by the Windhaven Network, Inc..
                                               All Rights Reserved.




file:///C|/!!witch/summation.html [2002-01-20 12:05:09 PM]
